<#MAN>
Essentials of Geology.

Volcanoes and Other Igneous Activity.
To assist you in learning the important concepts in this chapter, you will find it helpful to focus on the following questions:
What primary factors determine the nature of volcanic eruptions? How do these factors affect a magma's viscosity?
What materials are associated with a volcanic eruption?
What are the eruptive patterns and basic characteristics of the three types of volcanoes generally recognized by volcanologists?
What criteria are used to classify intrusive igneous bodies? What are some of these features?
What are the roles of temperature, pressure, and partial melting in the formation of magma?
What is the relation between volcanic activity and global tectonics?
0n Sunday, May 18, 1980, the largest volcanic eruption to occur in North America in historic times transformed a picturesque volcano into a decapitated remnant (compare Figures 4.1 and 4.2 ). On this date in southwestern Washington State, Mount St. Helens erupted with tremendous force. The blast blew out the entire north flank of the volcano, leaving a gaping hole. In one brief moment, a prominent volcano whose summit had been more than 2900 meters (9500 feet) above sea level was lowered by more than 400 meters (1350 feet).
The event devastated a vide swath of timber-rich land on the north side of the mountain. Trees within a 400-square-kilometer area lay intertwined and flattened, stripped of their branches and appearing from the air like toothpicks strewn about. The accompanying mudflows carried ash, trees, and water-saturated rock debris 29 kilometers clown the Toutle River. The eruption claimed 59 lives, some dying from the intense heat and the suffocating cloud of ash and gases , others from being hurled by the blast, and still others from entrapment in the mudflows.
The eruption ejected nearly one cubic kilometer of ash and rock debris (Figure 4.3). Following the devastating explosion, Mount St. Helens continued to emit great quantities of hot gases and ash. The force of the blast was so strong that some ash was propelled more than 18,000 meters (over 11 miles) into the stratosphere. During the next few days, this very fine-grained material was carried around Earth by strong upper-air winds. Measurable deposits were reported in Oklahoma and Minnesota, with crop damage into central Montana. Meanwhile, ash fallout in the immediate vicinity exceeded 2 meters in depth. The air over Yakima, Washington, (130 kilometers to the east) was so filled with ash that residents experienced midnight-like darkness at noon.
Anatomy of the Eruption
The events leading to the Mount St. Helens eruption began about two months earlier as a series of minor Earth tremors centered beneath the awakening mountain (Figure 4.4A). The tremors were caused by the upward movement of magma within the mountain. The first volcanic activity took place a week later, when a small amount of ash and steam rose from the summit. Over the next several weeks, sporadic eruptions of varied intensity occurred. Prior to the main eruption, the primary concern had been the potential hazard of mudflows. These moving lobes of saturated soil and rock are created as ice and snow melt from the heat emitted from magma within the volcano.
The only warning of a potential eruption was a bulge on the volcanoes north flank (Figure 4.4B). Careful monitoring of this dome-shaped structure indicated a very slow but steady growth rate of a few meters per day. If the growth rate of the bulge changed appreciably, an eruption might quickly follow. Unfortunately, no such variation was detected prior to the explosion. In fact, the seismic activity decreased during the two days preceding the huge blast.
Dozens of scientists were monitoring the mountain when it exploded. "Vancouver, Vancouver, this is it!" was the only warning-and last words from one scientist-that preceded the unleashing of tremendous quantities of pent-up gases. The trigger was a medium-sized earthquake. Its vibrations sent the north slope of the cone plummeting into the Toutle River, removing the overburden that had trapped the magma below (Figure 4.4C). With the pressure reduced, the water in the magma vaporized and expanded, causing the mountainside to rupture like an overheated steam boiler. Because the eruption originated around the bulge, several hundred meters below the summit, the initial blast was directed laterally rather than vertically. Had the full force of the eruption been upward, far less destruction would have occurred.
Mount St. Helens is one of 15 large volcanoes and innumerable smaller ones that comprise the Cascade Range, which extends from British Columbia to northern California. Eight of the largest volcanoes have been active in the past few hundred years. Of the remaining seven "active" volcanoes, the most likely to erupt again are Mount Baker and Mount Rainier in Washington, Mount Shasta and Lassen Peak in California, and Mount Hood in Oregon.

Not All Volcanoes Are Alike.
Not all volcanic eruptions are as violent as the 1980 Mount St. Helens event. Some volcanoes, such as Hawaii's Kilauea volcano, generate relatively quiet outpourings of fluid lavas (Figure 4.5). These "gentle" eruptions are not without some fiery displays; occasionally fountains of incandescent lava spray hundreds of meters into the air. Such events, however, are typically short-lived and harmless, and the lava generally falls back into a lava pool.
Testimony to the quiet nature of Kilauea's eruptions is the fact that the Hawaiian Volcanoes Observatory has operated on its summit since 1912. This, despite the fact that Kilauea has had more than 50 eruptive phases since record keeping began in 1823. Further, the longest and largest of Kilauea's eruptions began in 1983 and remains active, although it has received only modest media attention.
Why do volcanoes like Mount St. Helens erupt explosively, whereas others like Kilauea are relatively quiet? Why do volcanoes occur in chains like the Aleutian Islands or the Cascade Range? Why do some volcanoes form on the ocean floor, while others occur on the continents? This chapter will deal with these and other questions as we explore the formation and movement of magma.
The Nature of Volcanic Eruptions
Volcanic activity is commonly perceived as a process that produces a picturesque, cone-shaped structure that periodically erupts in a violent manner, like Mount St. Helens. But, as we pointed out, some eruptions are very explosive, whereas many others are not. What determines whether a volcano extrudes magma violently or "gently"? The primary factors are the magmas composition, its temperature, and the amount of dissolved gases it contains. To varying degrees these factors affect the magmas viscosity. The more viscous ("thicker") the material, the greater its resistance to flow. For example, syrup is more viscous than water.
Factors Affecting Viscosity.
The effect of temperature on viscosity is easily visualized. Just as heating syrup makes it more fluid (less viscous), the mobility of lava is strongly influenced by temperature changes. As a lava flow cools and begins to congeal, its mobility decreases and eventually the flow halts.
But a more significant factor influencing volcanic behavior is the chemical composition of magmas. This was discussed in Chapter 2 along with the classification of igneous rocks. Recall that a major difference among various igneous rocks is their silica (SiO2) content. The same is true of the magma from which rocks form. Magmas that produce basaltic rocks contain about 50 percent silica, whereas magmas that produce granitic rocks contain over 70 percent silica (Table 4.1).
Note that a magmas viscosity is directly related to its silica content. In general, the more silica in magma, the greater is its viscosity. The flow of magma is impeded because silicate structures link together into long chains, even before crystallization begins. Consequently, because of high silica content, granitic lavas are very viscous and tend to form comparatively short, thick flows. By contrast, basaltic lavas, which contain less silica, tend to be more fluid and have been known to travel distances exceeding 150 kilometers (90 miles) before congealing (Figure 4.5).
In Hawaiian eruptions, the magmas are hot and basaltic, so they are extruded with ease. By contrast, highly viscous granitic magmas are more difficult to force through a vent. The vent may become plugged with viscous magma, causing a buildup of gases and a great pressure increase, so a potentially explosive eruption may result. However, a viscous magma is not explosive by itself. It is the gas content that puts the "bang" into a violent eruption.
Importance of Dissolved Gases in Magma
Dissolved gases in; magma provide the force that extrudes molten rock from the vent. These gases are mostly water vapor and carbon dioxide. As magma moves into a near-surface environment, such as within a volcano, the confining pressure in the uppermost portion of the magma body is greatly reduced. This allows dissolved gases to be released suddenly, just as opening a soda bottle allows dissolved carbon dioxide gas to bubble out of the soda.
In the high-temperature magma and low near-surface pressure, these gases expand to hundreds of times their original volume. Very fluid basaltic magmas allow the expanding gases to bubble upward and escape from the vent with relative ease. As they escape, the gases will often propel incandescent lava hundreds of meters into the air, producing lava fountains, spectacular but harmless. Thus, eruptions of these fluid basaltic lavas such as those that occur in Hawaii, are relatively quiet.
At the other extreme, highly viscous magmas impede the upward migration of expanding gases. The gases collect in bubbles and pockets that increase in size and pressure until they explosively eject the semimolten rock from the volcano. The result is a Mount St. Helens or Mt. Pinatubo (Philippines).
To summarize, the viscosity of magma, plus the quantity of dissolved gases and the ease with which they can escape, determines the nature of a volcanic eruption. You can now understand the "gentle" volcanic eruptions of hot, fluid lavas in Hawaii and the explosive, violent, dangerous eruptions of viscous lavas in volcanoes such as Mount St. Helens.
What is Extruded During Eruptions?
Volcanoes extrude lava, large volumes of gas, and pyroclastics (broken rock, lava "bombs," fine ash, and dust). In this section we will examine each of these materials.
Lava Flows.
Because of their low Silica content, basaltic lavas are usually very fluid. They flow in thin, broad sheets or streamlike ribbons. On the island of Hawaii, such lavas have been clocked at 30 kilometers (20 miles) per hour clown steep slopes, but flow rates of 10 to 300 meters per hour are more common. In contrast, the movement of Silica-rich lava may be too slow to perceive.
When fluid basaltic lavas of the Hawaiian type congeal, they commonly form a relatively smooth skin that wrinkles as the still-molten subsurface lava continues to advance (Figure 4.6A). These are known as pahoehoe flows (pronounced pah-hoy-hoy) and resemble the twisted braids in ropes.
Another common basaltic lava has a surface of rough, jagged blocks with dangerously sharp edges and spiny projections, called aa (pronounced ah-ah) (Figure 4.6B). Active aa flows are relatively cool and thick and advance at 5 to 50 meters per hour, depending on the slope. Further, escaping gases fragment the cool surface and produce numerous voids and sharp spines in the congealing lava. As the molten interior advances, the outer crust is broken further, giving the flow the appearance of an advancing mass of lava rubble.
Gases.
Magmas contain varied amounts of dissolved gases held in the molten rock by confining pressure, just as carbon dioxide is held in soft drinks. As with soft drinks, as soon as the pressure is reduced, the gases begin to escape. Obtaining gas samples from an erupting volcano is difficult and dangerous, so geologists usually only estimate the amount of gas originally contained within the magma.
The gaseous portion of most magmas is believed to make up 1 to 5 percent of the total weight, with most of this being water vapor. Although the percentage may be small, the actual quantity of emitted gas can exceed thousands of tons per day.
The composition of volcanic gases is important because these gases are thought to be the original source of the water in the oceans. Further, volcanic eruptions have contributed much of the gases that compose the atmosphere. Analysis of samples taken during Hawaiian eruptions indicates that the gases are about 70 percent water vapor. 15 percent carbon dioxide, 5 percent nitrogen, 5 percent sulfur, and lesser amounts of chlorine, hydrogen, and argon. Sulfur compounds are easily recognized by their pungent odor and because they readily form sulfuric acid. Volcanoes are a natural source of air pollution, and can cause serious problems.
Pyroclastics
When basaltic lava is extruded. the dissolved gases escape quite freely and continually. These gases propel incandescent blobs of lava to great heights. Some ejected material may land near the vent and build a cone structure, whereas smaller particles will be carried great distances by the wind. In addition, the gases in highly viscous magmas become superheated, and upon release they expand a thousandfold as they blow pulverized rock, lava, and glass fragments from the vent. The particles produced by these processes are called pyroclastics (meaning "fire fragments"). These ejected lava fragments range in size from very fine dust and sand-sized volcanic ash, to large pieces (Figure 4.3).
Ash particles are produced when the extruded lava contains so many gas bubbles that it resembles the froth flowing from a newly opened bottle of champagne. As the hot gases expand explosively, the lava is disseminated into very fine glassy fragments. When the hot ash falls, the glassy shards often fuse to form welded tuff, which covers vast portions of the western United States. Sometimes the frothlike lava is ejected as pumice, a material having so man y voids (air spaces) that it often floats in water.
Also common are walnut-sized pyroclastics called lapilli ("little stones") and pea-sized particles called cinders. Particles larger than lapilli are called blocks when made of hardened lava and bombs when they are ejected as incandescent lava. Because bombs are semimolten upon ejection, they often take on a streamlined shape as they hurtle through the air (Figure 4.7).
Volcano Types.
Successive eruptions from a central vent build a mountainous accumulation we call a volcano. Located at the summit of many volcanoes is a steepwalled crater. The crater is connected to the underground magma chamber via a pipelike vent. Some volcanoes have unusually large craters-exceeding 1 kilometer in diameter-and are known as calderas.
When fluid Hawaiian-type lava leaves a conduit, it is often stored in the crater or caldera until it overflows. On the other hand, viscous lava forms a plug in the pipe. It rises slowly or is blown out, often, enlarging the crater.
Lava does not always issue from a central crater. Sometimes it is easier for the magma or escaping gases to push through fissures on the volcano's flanks. Mount Etna in Italy, for example, has more than 200 secondary vents. Some of these emit only gases and are appropriately called fumaroles.
The eruptive history, of each volcano is unique, so volcanoes vary in form and size. Nevertheless, volcanologists recognize three general eruptive pat. terns and characteristic forms: shield volcanoes, cinder cones, and composite cones. These three types are shown together for comparison in Figure 4.8. Note the massiveness of the shield volcano (Mauna Loa in Hawaii, Earth's largest active volcano). A large composite cone, Washington State's Mt. Rainier is dwarfed by Mauna Loa, and cinder cones are tiny in proportion to the other types.
We now will look at examples of the three types.
Shield Volcanoes.
When fluid Hawaiian-type lava is extruded, the volcano takes the shape of a broad, slightly domed structure called a shield volcano (Figure 4.9). They are so-called because they roughly resemble the shape of a warrior's shield. Shield volcanoes are built primarily of basaltic lava flows and contain only a  small percentage of pyroclastic material. Mauna Loa is one of five shield volcanoes that together make up the island of Hawaii. Its base rests on the ocean floor 5000 meters below sea level, and its summit is 4170 meters above the water, giving it a total height approaching 6 miles, greater than the height of Mount Everest. Nearly one million years and numerous eruptive cycles built this truly gigantic pile of volcanic rock. Many other volcanic structures, including Midway Island and the Galapagos Islands, have been built in a similar manner from the ocean's depths.
Perhaps the most active and intensively studied shield volcano is Kilauea, also on the island of Hawaii, on the flank of the larger Mauna Loa. Kilauea has erupted more than 50 times in recorded history and is still active today. Several months before an eruptive phase, Kilauea's summit inflates as magma rises from its source 60 kilometers or more below the surface. This molten rock gradually works its way upward and accumulates in smaller reservoirs 3 to 5 kilometers below the summit. For up to 24 hours in advance of each eruption, swarms of small earthquakes warn of the impending activity.
The longest and largest rift eruption ever recorded at Kilauea began in 1983 and continues as this is written. The eruption began along a 6.5-kilo meter (4-mile) fissure in an inaccessible forested area east of the summit caldera (Figure 4.10). By the summer of 1986, the eruptions shifted 3 kilometers downslope. Here, smooth-surfaced pahoehoe lava formed a lava lake. Eventually, it overflowed, and the fast-moving pahoehoe destroyed nearly a hundred rural homes, covered a major roadway. and eventually flowed into the sea. Lava has been intermittently pouring into the ocean since that time, adding new land to the island.
Interestingly, shield volcanoes exist elsewhere in the solar system. Olympus Mons, a huge shield volcano on Mars, is the largest yet located. Its summit caldera is nearly large enough to contain the above-water portion of Mauna Loa.
Cinder Cones
As the name suggests, cinder cones are built from ejected lava fragments. Loose pyroclastic material has a high angle of repose (between 30 and 40 degrees), the steepest angle at which the material remains stable. Thus, volcanoes of this type have very steep dopes (Figure 4.11). Cinder cones are rather small, usually less than 300 meters (1000 feet) high, often forming near larger volcanoes, and often in groups.
One of the very few volcanoes observed by geologists from beginning to end is the cinder cone called Paricutin about 200 miles west of Mexico City. In 1943, it erupted in a cornfield owned by Dionisio Pulido, who witnessed the event as he prepared the field for planting. For 2 weeks prior to the first eruption, numerous Earth tremors caused apprehension in the village of Paricutin about 3.5 kilometers away. Then sulfurous smoke began billowing from a small hole that had been in the cornfield for as long as Senor Pulido could remember. During the night, hoc, glowing rock fragments thrown into the air from the hole produced a spectacular fireworks display. In one day the cone grew to 40 meters (130 feet) and by the fifth day it was over 100 meters (330 feet) high. Explosive eruptions threw hoc fragments 1000 meters (3300 feet) above the crater rim. Larger fragments fell near the crater, some remaining incandescent as they rolled clown the slope. These built an aesthetically pleasing cone, while finer ash fell over a much larger area, burning and eventually covering the village of Paricutin. Within 2 years the cone attained its final height of about 400 meters (1300 feet).
The first lava flow came from a fissure chat opened just north of the cone, but after a few months flows began to emerge from the base of the cone itself. In June 1944, a clinkery aa flow 10 meters thick moved over much of the village of San Juan Parangaricutiro, leaving only the church steeple exposed (Figure 4.12). After 9 years, the activity ceased almost as quickly as it had begun. Today, Paricutin is just another one of the numerous quiet cinder cones dotting the landscape in this region of Mexico. Like the others, it will probably not erupt again.
Composite Cones.
Earth's most picturesque volcanoes are composite cones. Most active composite cones are in a narrow zone that encircles the Pacific Ocean, appropriately named the Ring of Fire. In this region are Fujiyama (Mt. Fuji) in Japan, Mount Mayon in the Philippines, and the picturesque volcanoes of the Cascade Range in the northwestern United States, including Mount St. Helens, Mount Rainier, and Mount Shasta (Figure 4.13).
A composite cone or stratovolcano is a large, nearly symmetrical structure composed of alternating lava flows and pyroclastic deposits, emitted mainly
from a central vent. Just as shield volcanoes owe their shape to the highly fluid nature of the extruded lavas, so too do composite cones reflect the nature of the erupted material.
Composite cones are produced when relatively viscous lavas of andesitic composition are extruded. A composite cone may extrude viscous lava for long periods. Then, suddenly, the eruptive style changes and the volcano violently ejects pyroclastic material. Most of it falls near the summit, building a steep-sided mound of cinders. In time, this debris becomes covered by new lava. Occasionally, both activities occur simultaneously. The resulting cone consists of alternating layers (strata) of lava and pyroclastics, giving rise to the name stratovolcano. Two of the most perfect cones, Mount Mayon in the Philippines and Fujiyama in Japan, exhibit the classic form of the stratovolcano with its steep summit and more gently sloping flanks.
Composite cones represent the most violent volcanic activity. Their eruption can be unexpected and devastating, as was the A.D. 79 eruption of the Italian volcano we now call Vesuvius. Prior to this eruption, Vesuvius had been dormant for centuries. Although minor earthquakes probably warned of the events to follow, Vesuvius was covered with dense vegetation and hardly looked threatening. On August 24, however, the tranquility ended, and in the next 3 days the city of Pompeii (near Naples) and more than 2000 of its 20,000 residents were buried. They remained so For nearly 17 centuries, until the city was rediscovered and excavated.
Nuée Ardente.
Although the destruction of Pompeii was catastrophic, even more devastating eruptions occur when a volcano ejects hot gases infused with incandescent ash. This produces a fiery cloud called a nuée ardente. Also referred to as glowing avalanches, these turbulent steam clouds and companion ash flows race down steep volcanic slopes at speeds that can approach 200 kilometers (125 miles) Per hour (Figure 4.14). The ground-hugging portions of glowing avalanches are rich in particulate matter that is suspended by hot, buoyant gases. Thus, these flows, which can include larger rock fragments in addition to ash, travel downslope in a nearly frictionless environment cushioned by expanding volcanic gases. This explains why some nuée ardente deposits extend more than 100 kilometers (60 miles) from their source.
In 1902, a nuée ardente from Mount Pelée, a small volcano on the Caribbean island of Martinique, destroyed the port town of St. Pierre. The destruction happened in moments and was so devastating that almost all of St. Pierre's 28,000 inhabitants were killed. Only a prisoner protected in a dungeon, a shoemaker, and a few people on ships in the harbor were spared (Figure 4.15).
It is interesting to contrast the destruction of St. Pierre with that of Pompeii. In 3 days, Pompeii was completely buried, whereas St. Pierre was destroyed in moments and its remains were mantled by only a thin layer of volcanic debris. The structures of Pompeii remained intact, except for roofs that collapsed under the weight of the ash. In St. Pierre, masonry walls nearly a meter thick were knocked over like dominoes; large trees were uprooted and cannons were torn from their mounts. Clearly, volcanic hazards vary from one volcano to another.
Lahar.
In addition to their violent eruptions, volcanoes offer other hazards. Large composite cones often generate a mudflow called by its Indonesian name lahar. These destructive flows occur when volcanic ash and debris become saturated with water and flow clown steep volcanic slopes, generally following stream valleys. Some lahars are produced when rainfall saturates volcanic
deposits, whereas others are triggered as large volumes of ice and snow melt during an eruption.
When Mount St. Helens erupted in 1980, several lahars formed. The flows and accompanying floods
raced down the valleys of the north and south forks of the Toutle River at speeds exceeding 30 kilometers per hour. Water levels reached 4 meters above flood stage, and nearly all the homes and bridges along the river were destroyed or severely damaged (Figure 4.16). Fortunately, the affected area was not densely populated. This was not the case in 1985, when Nevado del Ruiz, a volcano in the Andes, erupted and generated a lahar that killed nearly 20,000 people (see the section entitled "Mudflow" in Chapter 8).
Volcanic Landforms
The most obvious volcanic landform is a cone. But other distinctive landforms are associated with volcanic activity.
Volcanic Pipes and Necks
Most volcanoes are fed by conduits called pipes or vents, which are connected to a magma source near the surface. Some pipes are thought to extend tube-like directly into the asthenosphere, perhaps more than 100 kilometers. Consequently, the materials in these vents are considered to be samples of the asthenosphere that have undergone very little alteration during their ascent. Geologists thus consider pipes to be "windows" into Earth.
Occasionally a volcanic pipe will reach the surface, but the eruptive phase will cease before any lava is extruded. The upper portions of these pipes often contain a jumble of lava fragments and fragments that were torn from the walls of the vent. The best-known of these structures are the diamond-bearing pipes of South Africa. Here the rocks filling the pipes are thought to have originated at depths of about 200 kilometers, where pressures are great enough to generate diamonds. The diamonds crystallized at depth and were carried upward by the still-molten portion of the magma.
Volcanoes on land are continually being lowered by weathering and erosion. Cinder cones are easily eroded, because they are composed of unconsolidated materials. As erosion progresses, the rock occupying the vent is often more resistant and may remain standing above the surrounding terrain long after most of the cone has vanished. Ship Rock, New Mexico, is such a feature, called a volcanic neck (Figure 4.17). This structure, higher than many skyscrapers, is but one of many such landforms that protrude conspicuously from the red desert landscapes of the Southwest. Ultimately, even these resistant necks will succumb to relentless erosion over geologic time.
Craters and Calderas.
As noted, most volcanoes have a steep-walled crater. A crater is called a caldera when it exceeds 1 kilometer in diameter. Calderas are usually circular, with rather flat floors and steep walls. Most calderas probably form when the summit of a volcanic structure collapses into the partially emptied magma chamber below (Figure 4.18).
Crater Lake in Oregon, located in such a caldera, is 10 kilometers (6 miles) at its widest and 1175 meters (over 3800 feet) deep. The formation of Crater Lake began about 7000 years ago when the volcano, later to be named Mount Mazama, violently extruded 50 to 70 cubic kilometers of volcanic material. With the loss of support, 1500 meters (nearly a mile) of this once-prominent 3600-meter cone collapsed. After the collapse, rainwater filled the caldera. Later volcanic activity built a small cinder cone in the lake called Wizard Island, which today provides a mute reminder of past activity (Figure 4.19).
Not all calderas are produced by explosive eruptions. For example, Hawaii's active shield volcanoes, Mauna Loa and Kilauea, have large calderas (3 to 5 kilometers or 2 to 3 miles across and nearly 200 meters, or 650 feet deep). They formed by collapse as magma slowly drained from the summit magma chambers during flank eruptions.
Fissure Eruptions and Lava Plateaus
We think of volcanic eruptions as building a cone or mountain from a central vent. But by far the greatest volume of volcanic material is extruded from fractures in the crust called fissures. Rather than building a cone, these long, narrow cracks pour forth a low-viscosity Hawaiian-type lava, blanketing a wide area. This process occurs on both the seafloor (at spreading centers, Chapters 14 and 16) and on land.
On land, the extensive Columbia Plateau in the northwestern United States was formed this way (Figure 4.20). Here, numerous fissure eruptions extruded very fluid basaltic lava. Successive flows, some 50 meters thick, buried the existing landscape as they built a lava plateau that is nearly a mile thick in places (Figure 4.21). The fluidity is evident, because some lava remained molten long enough to flow 150 kilometers (90 miles) from its source. The term flood basalts appropriately describes these flows.
Pyroclastic Flows
When silica-rich magma is extruded, pyroclastic flows of ash and pumice fragments usually result. They are propelled away from the vent at high speeds and may blanket extensive areas before coming to rest. Once deposited, the pyroclastic materials may closely resemble lava flows.
Extensive pyroclastic flow deposits exist in many parts of the world, most associated with large calderas. Perhaps best known is the Yellowstone Plateau in northwestern Wyoming. Here a large magma body, rich in silica, still exists a few kilometers below the surface. Several times over the past two million years, fracturing of the rocks overlying the magma chamber has resulted in huge outpourings, accompanied by the formation of calderas. In Yellowstone National Park, numerous buried fossil forests have been discovered. Following volcanic activity, a forest would develop on a newly formed volcanic surface, only to be covered by ash from the next eruptive phase. Fortunately, no eruption of this type has occurred in historic times.
The idea that explosive volcanic eruptions change Earth's climate was first proposed many years ago and still appears to explain some aspects of climatic variability. Explosive eruptions emit huge quantities of gases and fine-grained debris into the atmosphere. The greatest eruptions inject material high into the stratosphere, where it spreads around the globe and remains for months or even years. The basic premise is that this suspended volcanic material (most importantly, droplets of sulfuric acid) will filter out a portion of the incoming solar radiation, and this, in turn, will lower air temperatures worldwide.
Perhaps the most notable cool period linked to a volcanic event is the "year without a summer" that followed the 1815 eruption of Mount Tambora in Indonesia. The abnormally cold spring and summer of 1816 in many parts of the Northern Hemisphere, including New England, are believed to have been caused by the cloud of volcanic debris and gases ejected from Tambora (see Box 4.1).
When Mount St. Helens erupted in 1980, there was almost immediate speculation: Can an eruption such as this change our climate? Although spectacular, a single explosive volcanic eruption of the magnitude of Mount St. Helens occurs somewhere in the world every 2 to 3 years. Studies of these events indicate that a very slight cooling of the lower atmosphere does occur. However, it is believed that the cooling is so slight, less than one-tenth of one degree Celsius as to be inconsequential.
The huge eruption of the Philippines' Mount Pinatubo in 1991 gave scientists another opportunity to test the connection between volcanism and climatic change. In 1991, this volcano emitted huge quantities of ash and 25 million to 30 million tons of sulfur dioxide gas. The gaseous component turned into a haze of tiny sulfuric acid droplets. Because this material was superhot, it rose to heights of 20 to 30 kilometers and quickly encircled the entire globe. This Sun-blocking haze was probably the most massive since the eruption of the Indonesian volcano Krakatau in 1883. Studies indicated that the average global surface temperature had declined by about 0.6C (1F) when compared to the average of the year before. Scientists hope to learn more about the volcano/climate connection as subsequent data are analyzed.
Intrusive Igneous Activity
Volcanic eruptions tan be among the most violent and spectacular events in nature and thus receive much scientific attention. Yet most magma is deep underground, intruding into existing rocks. An understanding of this intrusive igneous activity is therefore as important to geologists as is the study of volcanic events on the surface. In mythology, Pluto was lord of the underworld. Thus, underground igneous rock bodies are called plutons.
Intrusive Igneous Bodies
Figure 4.22 shows intrusive igneous bodies (plutons) that form when magma crystallizes within Earth's crust. Notice that some of these structures are flat, whereas others are bulky masses. Some cut through existing structures, such as layers of sedimentary rocks, while others form when magma is injected between sedimentary layers. Owing to these differences, plutons are generally classified according to their shape as either tabular (flat) or massive, and by their orientation with respect to the host rock. Intrusive igneous bodies are said to be discordant if they cut across existing sedimentary beds, and concordant if they form parallel to the existing sedimentary beds.
Dikes are tabular plutons produced when magma is injected into fractures that cut across rock layers. They range in thickness from less than 1 centimeter to more than 1 kilometer. The largest are hundreds of kilometers long. Dikes are often oriented vertically, forming in pathways followed by molten rock that fed ancient lava flows. Frequently, dikes are more resistant to weathering than the surrounding rock. When exposed, such dikes have the appearance of a wall, as shown in Figures 4.17 and 4.22B.
Sills are tabular plutons formed when very fluid basaltic magma is injected along sedimentary bedding surfaces (Figure 4.23). Horizontal sills are the most common; hence the name, like a window sill. Injection of a sill raises the overlying sedimentary rock to a height equal to the thickness of the sill. Consequently, sills can form only at relatively shallow depths where the pressure exerted by the weight of overlying strata is relatively low.
One of the largest and best-known sills in the United States is the Palisades Sill, which is exposed along the Hudson River near New York City. This resistant, 300-meer-thick sill has formed an imposing cliff easily seen from across the river.
Laccoliths form the same way as sills, but from more viscous magma, which collects as a lens-shaped mass that arches the overlying strata upward. Consequently, a laccolith can occasionally be detected because of the dome it creates at the surface (Figure 4.22B).
Batholiths are by far the largest intrusive igneous bodies. The Idaho batholith, for example, encompasses more than 40,000 square kilometers. Indirect evidence from gravitational studies indicates that batholiths are also very thick, possibly extending dozens of kilometers into the crust. Geologists define a batholith as an intrusive body with a surface exposure of more than 100 square kilometers (40 square miles). Similar but smaller intrusive bodies are termed stocks. Many stocks appear to be portions of batholiths that are not yet fully exposed. Both a batholith and a stock are illustrated in Figure 4.22C.
Batholiths frequently form the cores of mountain systems. Here, uplift and erosion have removed the surrounding rock to expose the resistant igneous batholith. Some of the highest mountain peaks, such as Mount Whitney in the Sierra Nevada, are being eroded from such a granitic mass. Large batholiths form over millions of years. The intrusive activity that created the Sierra Nevada batholith, for example; occurred nearly continuously over a 130-million-year span (Figure 4.24).
Large expanses of granitic rock are also exposed in the stable interiors of the continents, such as the Canadian Shield of North America. These relatively flat outcrops are believed to be the remnants of ancient mountains that erosion has long since leveled.
Igneous Activity and Plate Tectonics
The origin of magma has been controversial in geology almost from the beginning of the science. How do magmas of different compositions form? Why do volcanoes in the deep-ocean basins primarily extrude basaltic lava (Hawaii), whereas those adjacent to oceanic trenches extrude mainly andesitic lava (Mount St. Helens)? Why does an area of igneous activity, commonly called the Ring of Fire, surround the Pacific Ocean? Insights from the theory of plate tectonics are providing answers. We will first examine the origin of magma and then look at the global distribution of volcanic activity as viewed by the plate tectonics model.
Origin of Magma
Based on available scientific evidence, the crust and mantle are composed primarily of solid rock, not a molten liquid. The outer core is in a fluid state, but this material is very dense and remains deep within Earth. So what could be the source of magma that produces volcanic activity?
Temperature and Magma Generation Geologists conclude that magma must originate from essentially solid rock in the crust and mantle. The most obvious way to generate magma from solid rock is to raise the temperature above the rock's melting point. In a near-surface environment, silica-rich rocks of granitic composition begin to melt about 750°C (1400°F), whereas basaltic rocks must reach temperatures above 1000°°-C (1850°°-F) before melting commences.
What is the source of heat sufficient to melt this rock? One source is the heat liberated during the decay of radioactive elements found in the mantle and crust. Workers in underground mines have long
recognized that temperatures increase as they descend to greater depths. A rule of thumb is that temperature increases 20-30C (35-55F) per kilometer depth in the upper crust.
This gradual increase in temperature with depth is thought to contribute to magma production (rock-melting) in two ways. First, at deep-ocean trenches, slabs of cool oceanic lithosphere sphere descend into the hot mantle. Heat supplied by the surrounding rocks is thought to melt some of the subducting oceanic crust and overlying sediments. Second, heat drives water and other fluids from the subducted rocks into the overlying mantle. These substances then act as a flux does at a foundry, causing melting in the mantle at reduced temperatures. The result of these processes is the generation of basaltic magma.
Once a hot magma body forms as just described, the molten rock could migrate upward to the base of the crust and intrude granitic rocks. Because granitic rocks have melting temperatures well below those of basalt, heat derived from the hotter basaltic magma could melt the already warm crustal rocks. The volcanic activity that produced the vast ash flows in Yellowstone National Park is believed to have resulted from such activity. Here basaltic magma from the mantle transported heat to the crust, where the melting of silica-rich rocks generated explosive outflows of pyroclastics.
Role of Pressure. If temperature were the only factor that determined whether or not rock melts, Earth would be a molten ball covered with a thin, solid outer shell. This. of course, is not the case. The reason is that pressure also increases with depth.
In general, an increase in the confining pressure increases a rocks melting temperature. (Molten rock requires more space than solid rock, so under great pressure rocks stay solid, even well above their melting temperature at surface pressures.) By contrast, reducing confining pressure lowers a rocks melting temperature. Consequently, a drop in confining pressure tan lower the melting temperature of rock sufficiently to trigger melting. This occurs when rock ascends, thereby moving into zones of lower pressures.
Partial Melting An important difference exists between the melting of a substance that consists of a single compound, such as ice, and the melting of igneous rocks, which are mixtures of several different minerals. Whereas ice melts at a definite temperature, most igneous rocks melt over a temperature range of a few hundred degrees (recall Bowen's Reaction Series in Chapter 3). As a rock is heated, the first melt to form will contain a higher percentage of the low-melting-temperature minerals than the original rock. Should melting continue. the composition of the melt will steadily approach the overall composition of the rock from which it is derived as more of its minerals melt. Most often. however, melting, is not complete. This process, known as partial melting, produces most, if not all, magma.
Thus, an important consequence of partial melting is the production of a melt with a higher silica content than the parent rock. Recall that basaltic rocks have a relatively low silica content and that granitic rocks have a much higher silica content. Consequently, magmas generated by partial melting are more granitic than the parent material from which they formed. As you shall see, this will help us understand the global distribution of the different types of volcanic activity.
Distribution of Igneous Activity
Earth has more than 600 active volcanoes and most are near convergent plate margins. Further, extensive volcanic activity (fissure eruptions) occurs along spreading centers of the oceanic ridge system, hidden from easy view by the world's ocean. In this section we will examine three zones of volcanic activity and relate all of them to global tectonic activity. These active areas are along oceanic ridges
(spreading centers), adjacent to ocean trenches (subduction zones), and within the plates themselves (intraplate). These three settings are shown in Figure 4.25, which highlights two examples of each. Please refer to this illustration as you read the following.
Spreading Center Volcanism The greatest volume of volcanic rock is produced along the oceanic ridge system, where sea-floor spreading is active (Figure 4.25A). As the rigid lithosphere pulls apart, the pressure on the underlying rocks is lessened. This reduced pressure, in turn, lowers the melting temperature of the mantle rocks. Partial melting of these rocks (primarily peridotite) generates large quantities of basaltic magma that moves upward to fill the newly formed cracks.
Some of the molten basalt reaches the ocean floor, where it produces extensive lava flows or occasionally grows into a volcanic pile. Sometimes this activity produces a volcanic cone that rises above sea level, as the island of Surtsey did near the toast of Iceland in 1963 (Figure 4.26). Numerous submerged volcanic cones also dot the flanks of the ridge system and the adjacent deep-ocean floor (see Figure 14.4). Many of these formed along the ridge crests and were moved away as new oceanic trust was created by the process of sea-floor spreading.
Spreading center volcanism also occurs less often on the continents. The classic example is the African Rift Zone shown in Figure 4.25A (lower right). If this rift continues to spread, Africa eventually will be divided into two continents.
subduction Zone Volcanism Recall that ocean trenches are sites where slabs of oceanic trust are bent and move downward into the upper mantle (Figure 4.25B). When the descending oceanic plate reaches a depth of about 100 kilometers (60 miles), partial melting of the water-rich ocean trust and the overlying mantle rocks takes place. The partial melting of these materials is thought to produce basaltic and andesitic magmas. When enough magma bas accumulated, the molten material slowly migrates upward toward the surface. It moves upward because it is less dense than the surrounding solid rock.
When subduction zone volcanism occurs in the ocean, a chain of volcanoes called an island arc is produced. Examples are numerous in the Pacific and include the Tonga Islands, Mariana Islands, and Aleutian Islands (Figure 4.25B, upper left).
When subduction occurs beneath continental trust, the magma generated is often altered before it solidifies. Assimilation of crustal fragments into the ascending magma body can create a melt with a composition that is andesitic to granitic. The volcanoes of the Andes Mountains, from which andesite gets its name, are examples of this mechanism at work (Figure 4.25B, louver center).
Many volcanoes border the Pacific Basin, giving this region the name Ring of Fire. Volcanism here is associated with subduction and partial melting of the Pacific seafloor as it is shoved beneath the continents chat surround the Pacific. As these oceanic plates sink, they carry with them sediments and oceanic crust containing abundant water. Because water reduces the melting point of rock, it aids the melting process that generates fresh magma for volcanoes.
The presence of water contributes to the high gas content (water vapor) and explosive nature of volcanoes that make up the Ring of Fire. The volcanoes of the Cascade Range in the northwestern United States (including Mount St. Helens, Mount Rainier, and Mount Shasta), as well as Mount Pinatubo, Tambora, and Krakatau, are all of this type. The Cascade volcanoes are shown in their tectonic setting in Figure 4.27.
Intraplate Volcanism Volcanic activity occurs along plate boundaries for the reasons just described. But eruptions also occur in the middle of plates, both continental and oceanic. Why?
The processes that trigger volcanic activity within a rigid plate are difficult to establish. Consider this: Activity in the Yellowstone region produced silica rich lava, pumice, and ash -flows, whereas extensive basaltic flows have formed the nearby Columbia Plateau. Yet these rocks of greatly varying compositions actually overlie one another in several locations.
Because basaltic volcanism occurs on the continents as well as within the ocean basins, it may have
a common source. Most likely the source is the partial melting of mantle rocks. One proposal suggests that some intraplate basaltic magma comes from rising plumes of hot mantle material. These hot plumes, which may extend to the core-mantle boundary, produce hot spots, local volcanic regions only a few hundred kilometers across. Most hot spots appear to have persisted for a few tens of millions of years. One hot spot is located beneath the island of Hawaii
(Figure 4.25C, lower left). Another may have produced the large outpourings of lava that make up the Columbia Plateau.
Generally, lavas and ash of granitic composition are extruded from vents located inland from the continental margins. This suggests that remelting of the continental crust may form these silica-rich magmas. But what mechanism causes large quantities of continental material to melt? One idea is that a thick segment of continental crust occasionally becomes situated over a rising plume of hot mantle material. Rather than producing vast outpourings of basaltic lava, as occurs at oceanic sites such as Hawaii, magma from the rising plume is emplaced at depth. Here the incorporation and melting of surrounding rock forms a secondary, silica-rich, viscous magma, which slowly migrates upward. Continued hot spot activity supplies heat to the rising mass, thereby aiding its ascent. This may explain the activity in the Yellowstone region (Figure 4.25C, upper center).
Although the theory of plate tectonics has answered many questions that plagued volcanologists for decades, new questions have arisen: Why does sea-floor spreading occur in some areas and not in others? How do hot spots originate? These and other questions are the subject of continuing geologic research.

In May 1980, Washington state's Mount St. Helens erupted explosively, sending huge quantities of volcanic ash and debris into the atmosphere.

A. March 20, 1980. Intrusion of magma generates earthquakes.
B. April 23, 1980

Figure 4.4 Idealized diagrams showing the 1980 eruption of Mount St Helens.
A. First, a sizeable earthquake recorded on Mount St. Helens indicates that renewed volcanic activity is possible.
B.  Alarming growth of a bulge on the north flank suggests increasing magma pressure below.
C. Triggered by an earthquake, a giant landslide relieves the confining pressure on the magma body and initiates an explosive lateral blast.
D. Within seconds, a large vertical eruption sends a column of volcanic ash to an altitute of about 19 kilometeres. This hase of the eruption continues for over nine hours.
A. March 18, 1980. Landslide followed by explosive lateral blast.
B. April 23, 1980. Continued intrusion of magma produces bulge.
C. May 18, 1980. Landslide followed by explosive lateral blast. Lateral blast /landslide debris
D. May 18, 1980. Full vertical eruption develops. Lateral blast.



FIGURE 4.5 Fluid lava emitted from a flank eruption on Kilauea, Hawaii (Photo by Paul Chesley/Tony Stone Images)


FIGURE 4.6 A. Typical pahoehoe (ropy) lava flow, Kilauea, Hawaii. B. Typical slow-moving aa flow. (Photos by J. D. Griggs/U.S. Geological Survey)

FIGURE 4.7 Volcanic bombs. Ejected lava fragments take on a streamlined shape as they sail through the air. This bomb is approximately 10 centimeters in length. (Photo by E. J.Tarbuck)

FIGURE 4.8 Profiles of volcanic landforms. A. Profile of Mauna Loa, Hawaii, the largest shield volcano in the Hawaiian chain. Note size comparison with Mt. Rainier Washington, a large composite cane. B. Profile of Mt. Rainier, Washington. Note how it dwarfs a typical cinder cone. C. Profile of Sunset Crater, Arizona, a typical steep-sided cinder cone.

FIGURE 4.9 Mauna Loa is one of five shield volcanoes that together make up the island of Hawaii. Shield volcanoes are built primarily of fluid basaltic lava flows and contain only a small percentage of pyroclastic materials. (Photo by Greg Vaughn)

FIGURE 4.10
Lava extruded along the East Rift Zone, Kilauea, Hawaii. (Photo by Greg Vaughn)

FIGURE 4.11 SP Crater, a cinder cone north of Flagstaff, Arizona. Note the road across the lava flow for scale. Cinder cones are built from ejected lava fragments and are usually less than 300 meters (1000 feet) high. (Photo by Michael Collier)

FIGURE 4.12 The village of San Juan Parangaricutiro engulfed by lava from Paricutin, shown in the background. Only the church towers remain. (Photo by Tad Nichols)

FIGURE 4.13 Mount Shasta, California, one of the largest composite cones in the Cascade Range. (Photo by John S. Shelton)

FIGURE 4.14 Nuée ardente races down the slope of Mount St. Helens on August 7, 1980, at speeds in excess of 100 kilometers (60 miles) per hour. (Photo by Peter W. Lipman, U.S. Geological Survey)

FIGURE 4.15 St. Pierre as it appeared shortly after the eruption of Mount Pelée, 1902. (Reproduced from the collection of the Library of Congress)

FIGURE 4.16 A house damaged by debris from lahars that flowed along the Toutle River, west-northwest of Mount St. Helens. The end section of the house was torn free and lodged against trees. (Photo by D. R. Crandell, U.S. Geological Survey)

FIGURE 4.17 Ship Rock, New Mexico, is a volcanic neck. This structure, over 420 meters (a quarter mile) high, consists of igneous rock that crystallized in the vent of a volcano. The volcano has long since been eroded away, leaving the harder rock of the neck. The tabular structure in the foreground is a dike that fed lava flows along the flanks of the once-active volcano. (Photo by Tom Till)

FIGURE 4.18 Sequence of events that formed Crater Lake, Oregon. About 7000 years ago, a violent eruption partly emptied the magma chamber, causing the summit of former Mount Mazama to collapse. Rainfall and groundwater contributed to form Crater Lake, the deepest lake in the United States. Subsequent eruptions produced the cinder cone called Wizard Island. (After H.Williams, The Ancient Volcanoes of Oregon, p.47. Courtesy of the University of Oregon)

FIGURE 4.19 Crater Lake in Oregon occupies a caldera about 6 miles in diameter. (Photo by GregVaughn/Tom Stack and Associates)

Box 4,1
The Year Without A Summer
In Figure 4.A, compare the volume of volcanic debris extruded during some well-known eruptions, beginning with Mount Vesuvius in A.D. 79. The eruption of Tambora is clearly the largest in modern times. In 1815, this nearly 4000-meter Indonesian volcano violently ejected an estimated 30 cubic kilometers of volcanic debris. That is 30 times more than was emitted from Mount St Helens in 1980.
Although the Tambora eruption occurred in an isolated part of the world, circulation high in the atmosphere spread its influence far and wide. The impact of its dust and gases on climate is believed to have been widespread in the Northern Hemisphere. One researcher noted, "The extreme cold that prevailed during the spring and summer of 1816 in some regions of the world represents one of the most unusual climatic episodes that has occurred since the advent of instrumental weather observations." The effects were especially severe in New England, where 1816 has tome to be known as the "year without a summer."
From May through September 1816, unprecedented cold affected the Northeast and adjacent Canada. The result was a late spring, a cold summer, and an early fall. Heavy snow fell in June and frosts occurred in July and August, killing crops. Temperatures in New England averaged 3.5°C below normal in June and 1-2°C below normal in August Although temperatures this cold had occurred before, there has been no other such protracted span of cold since record keeping began. The reduced averages may seem modest to you, but they took place in a region where even a small drop tan mean severe frost.
The chill was widespread. "Although the New England farmer considered it a local tragedy, the abnormal weather was widespread throughout the Northern Hemisphere. In England it was almost as cold as in the United States, and 1816 was a famine year there, as it was in France and Germany."
The unusual meteorological events of 1816 that followed the massive 1815 eruption of Tambora are regarded by many as a spectacular example of the influence of explosive volcanism on climate.
American Weather Stories (Washington, DC: National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
FIGURE 4.A
Approximate volume of volcanic debris emitted during some well-known eruptions. The 1815 eruption of Tambora, the largest-known eruption in historic time, ejected over 30 times more ash than did Mount St. Helens in 1980.


FIGURE 4.23 Salt River Canyon, Arizona. The dark, essentially horizontal band is a sill of basaltic composition that intruded into horizontal layers of sedimentary rock. (Photo by E. J.Tarbuck)
FIGURE 4.24 Half Dome in Yosemite National Park, California. This feature is just a tiny Portion of the Sierra Nevada batholith, a huge structure that extends for approximately 400 kilometers. (Photo by Lewis Kemper/DRK Photo)

FIGURE 4.25 Three settings where volcanism occurs (two examples of each). A. Spreading centers are along divergent plate boundaries. B. Subduction zones are along convergent plate boundaries. C. Intraplate volcanism occurs in isolated places within plates, away from boundaries.


FIGURE 4.26 The volcanic island of Surtsey emerged from the ocean just south of Iceland in 1963. (Courtesy of P Vauthey/Sygma)
FIGURE 4.27 Locations of several of the larger composite cones that comprise the Cascade Range.


The Chapter in Review.
The following statements are intended to help you review the primary objectives presented in this chapter.
The primary factors that determine the nature of volcanic eruptions include the magmas composition, its temperature, and the amount of dissolved gases it contains. As lava cools, it begins to congeal, and, as viscosity, increases, its mobility decreases. The viscosity of 'magma is directly related to its silica content. Granitic lava, with its high silica content (over 70 percent), is very viscous and forms short, thick flows. Basaltic lava, with a louver silica content (about 50 percent), is more fluid and may travel a long distance before congealing. Dissolved gases tend to increase the fluidity of magma and, as they expand, provide the force that propels molten rock from the vent of a volcano.
The materials associated with a volcanic eruption include (1) lava flows (pahoehoe flows, which resemble twisted braids, and aa flows, consisting of rough jagged blocks, both form from basaltic lavas); (2) gases (primarily in the form of water vapor); and (3) pyroclastic material (pulverized rock and lava fragments blown from the volcanoes vent, which include ash, pumice, lapilli, cinders, blocks, and bombs).
Successive eruptions of lava from a central vent result in a mountainous accumulation of material known as a volcano. Located at the summit of many volcanoes is a steep-walled depression called a crater. Shield cones are broad, slightly domed volcanoes built primarily of fluid, basaltic lava. Cinder cones have very steep slopes composed of pyroclastic material. Composite cones, or stratovolcanoes, are large, nearly symmetrical structures built of interbedded lavas and pyroclastic deposits. Composite cones represent the most violent type of volcanic activity. Often associated with a violent eruption is a nuée ardente, a fiery cloud of hot gases infused with incandescent ash that races down steep volcanic slopes. Large composite cones may generate a type of mudflow known as a lahar.
Most volcanoes are fed by conduits called pipes or vents. As erosion progresses, the rock occupying the vent is often more resistant and may remain standing above the surrounding terrain as a volcanic neck. The summits of some volcanoes have large, nearly circular depressions that exceed 1 kilometer in diameter called calderas. Although volcanic eruptions from a central vent are the most familiar, by far the largest amounts of volcanic material are extruded from cracks in the crust called fissures. The term flood basalts describes the fluid, water-like, basaltic lava flows that cover an extensive region in the northwestern United States known as the Columbia Plateau. When silica-rich magma is extruded, pyroclastic flows consisting largely of ash and pumice fragments usually result. Explosive volcanic eruptions are regarded as an explanation for some aspects of Earth's climatic variability. The basic premise is that suspended volcanic material will filter out a portion of the incoming solar radiation, which, in turn, will louver air temperature in the lower atmosphere.
Intrusive igneous bodies are classified according to their shape and by their orientation with respect to the host rock, generally sedimentary rock. The two general shapes are tabular (sheetlike) and massive. Intrusive igneous bodies that cut across existing sedimentary beds are said to be discordant; those that form parallel to existing sedimentary beds are concordant.
Dikes are tabular, discordant igneous bodies produced when magma is injected into fractures that cut across rock layers. Tabular, concordant bodies, called sills, form when magma is injected along the bedding surfaces of sedimentary rocks. In many respects sills closely resemble buried lava flows. Laccoliths are similar to sills but form from less-fluid magma that collects as a lens-shaped mass that arches the overlying strata upward. Batholiths, the largest intrusive igneous bodies with surface exposures of more than 100 square kilometers (40 square miles), frequently make up the cores of mountains.
Temperature, pressure, and partial melting all influence the formation of magma. By raising its temperature, solid rock will melt and generate magma. One source of heat is that which is released by the decay of radioactive elements found in Earth's mantle and crust. Second, a drop in confining pressure can louver the melting temperature of rock sufficiently to trigger melting. Third, igneous rock, which contains several different minerals, melts over a range of temperatures, with the louver temperature minerals melting first. This process, known as partial melting, produces most, if not all, magma. Partial melting often results in the production of a melt with a higher silica content than the parent rock.
Most active volcanoes are associated with plate boundaries. Active areas of volcanism are found along the oceanic ridges (spreading center volcanism), adjacent to ocean trenches (subduction zone volcanism), as well as the interiors of plates themselves (intraplate volcanism).

KeyTerms
aa flow (p. 71) batholith (p. 83) caldera (p. 72) cinder cone (p. 73) composite cone (stratovolcano) (p. 74) crater (p. 72)dike (p. 83) fissure (p. 80) flood basalt (p. 80) hot spot (p. 88) laccolith (p. 83) lahar (p. 75)nuée ardente (p. 75)pahoehoe flow (p. 71) partial melting (p. 86) pipe (p. 78) pyroclastic flow (p. 80) pyroclastics (p. 71) shield volcano (p. 72) sill (p. 83)vent (p. 72) viscosity (p. 68) volcanic neck (p. 78) volcano (p. 72)

Questions for Review
What triggered the 1980 eruption of Mount St. Helens?
Name five volcanoes in the western United States that geologists believe will erupt again.
What is the difference between magma and lava?
What three factors determine the nature of a volcanic eruption? What role does each play?
Why is a volcano fed by highly viscous magma likely to be a greater threat than a volcano supplied with very fluid magma?
Describe pahoehoe and aa lava.
List the main gases released during a volcanic eruption. Why are gases important in eruptions?
Analysis of samples taken during Hawaiian eruptions on the island of Hawaii indicate that water vapor was the most abundant gas released.
Describe each type of pyroclastic material.
Compare and contrast the main types of volcanoes (size, shape, eruptive style, and so forth).
Name one example of each of the three types of volcanoes.
Compare the formation and size of Mauna Loa and Paricutin.
How is a caldera different from a crater?
Describe the formation of Crater Lake. Compare it to the caldera formed during the eruption of Kilauea.

Briefly describe the mechanism by which explosive volcanic eruptions are thought to influence Earth's climate.
What is Ship Rock, New Mexico. and how did it form?
Describe each of the four intrusive features discussed in the text.
Why might a laccolith be detected at Earth's surface before being exposed by erosion?
What is the largest of all intrusive igneous bodies? Is it tabular or massive? Concordant or discordant?
Explain how most magma is thought to originate.
Spreading center volcanism is associated with which rock type? What causes rocks to melt in regions of spreading center volcanism?
What is the Ring of Fire?
Are volcanic eruptions in the Ring of Fire generally quiet or violent? Name a volcano that would support your answer.
The Hawaiian Islands and Yellowstone are thought to be associated with which of the three zones of volcanism?
Volcanic islands in the deep ocean are composed primarily of what igneous rock type?
Explain why andesitic and granitic rocks are confined to the continents and oceanic margins but are absent from deep-ocean basins.

Testing What You Have Learned
To test your knowledge of the material presented in this chapter, answer the following questions.
Multiple-Choice Questions
1. Which one of the following provides the force that propels molten rock from the vent of a volcano? Escaping gases
2. Igneous intrusive bodies with a surface exposure of more than 100 square kilometers (40 square miles) that frequently compose the cores of mountain systems are referred to as batholiths. 
3. Subduction zone volcanism in the ocean produces a chain of volcanoes called an island arc. 
4. Intrusive igneous bodies that cut across sedimentary beds are said to be discordant
5. What is the most abundant gas found in magma? water vapor
6. The Hawaiian Islands consist primarily of what type of volcanic cone? shield
7. The process by which igneous rocks melt over a temperature range of a few hundred degrees is known as partial melting.
8. The area commonly called the Ring of Fire encircles the Pacific Ocean.
9. Nuée ardente and lahar are phenomena associated with: composite cones 
10. Which of the following is NOT a primary factor that affects the viscosity of magma? Age

Fill-Ins Questions.
11. Basaltic lava with a surface of rough, jagged blocks is called aa.
12. Although volcanic eruptions from a central vent are most familiar, by far the largest amounts of volcanic material are extruded from fractures in the crust called fissures.
13. Dikes are sheetlike intrusive igneous bodies that form when magma is injected into fractures that cut across rock layers.
14. Most of the more than 600 active volcanoes that have been identified are located in the vicinity of convergent plate boundaries.
15. Rising plumes of hot mantle material produce intraplate volcanic regions a few hundred kilometers across called hot spots.

True/False Questions.
16. The greatest volume of volcanic rock is produced along the oceanic ridge system. TRUE
17. Shield cones represent the most violent type of volcanic activity. FALSE
18. Pyroclastic flows consist largely of ash and pumice fragments produced when silica-rich magma is extruded. TRUE
19. Within Earth there is a gradual temperature increase with depth. TRUE
20. Partial melting often produces a melt with a lower silica content than the parent rock. FALSE

<#TEA>
*
A Teacher's Guide to the Geology of Hawaii Volcanoes National Park 
1. Plate Tectonics.
Introduction
Plate tectonics is a relatively new theory that has revolutionized the way geologists think about the Earth. According to the theory, the surface of the Earth is broken into large plates. The size and position of these plates change over time. The edges of these plates, where they move against each other, are sites of intense geologic activity, such as earthquakes, volcanoes, and mountain building. Plate tectonics is a combination of two earlier ideas, continental drift and sea-floor spreading. Continental drift is the movement of continents over the Earth's surface and in their change in position relative to each other. Sea-floor spreading is the creation of new oceanic crust at mid-ocean ridges and movement of the crust away from the mid-ocean ridges. 
The lesson starts with a description of the chemical and physical layers of the Earth. Then the historical development of the plate tectonic theory is described. The lesson concludes with descriptions of the location and types of plate boundaries. This lesson is longer than most . A concise classroom presentation might describe the layers of the Earth, location of plate boundaries, and types of plate motion. 
Layers of the Earth
The Earth is divided into three chemical layers: the core, the mantle and the crust. The core is composed of mostly iron and nickel and remains very hot, even after 4.5 billion years of cooling. The core is divided into two layers: a solid inner core and a liquid outer core. The middle layer of the Earth, the mantle, is made of minerals rich in the elements iron, magnesium, silicon, and oxygen. The crust is rich in the elements oxygen and silicon with lesser amounts of aluminum, iron, magnesium, calcium, potassium, and sodium. There are two types of crust. Basalt is the most common rock on Earth. Oceanic crust is made of relatively dense rock called basalt. Continental crust is made of lower density rocks, such as andesite and granite. 
The outermost layers of the Earth can be divided by their physical properties into lithosphere and asthenosphere. 
The lithosphere (from the Greek, lithos, stone) is the rigid outermost layer made of crust and uppermost mantle. The lithosphere is the "plate" of the plate tectonic theory. The asthenosphere (from the Greek, asthenos, devoid of force) is part of the mantle that flows, a characteristic called plastic behavior. It might seem strange that a solid material can flow. A good example of a solid that flows, or of plastic behavior, is the movement of toothpaste in a tube. The flow of the asthenosphere is part of mantle convection, which plays an important role in moving lithospheric plates. 
Continental Drift
Continental drift was originally proposed by Alfred Wegener, a German meteorologist, in 1912. Wegener used the fit of the continents, the distribution of fossils, a similar sequence of rocks at numerous locations, ancient climates, and the apparent wandering of the Earth's polar regions to support his idea. Wegener used his observations to hypothesize that all of the present-day continents were once part of a single supercontinent called Pangaea. 
Continental Drift - Fossils
Fossils of the same species were found on several different continents. Wegener proposed that the species dispersed when the continents were connected and later carried to their present positions as the continents drifted. For example, Glossopteris, a fern, was found on the continents of South America, Africa, India, and Australia. If the continents are reassembled into Pangaea, the distribution of Glossopteris can be accounted for over a much smaller contiguous geographic area. The distribution of other species can also be accounted for by initially spreading across Pangaea, followed by the breakup of the supercontinent, and movement of the continents to their present positions. 
Continental Drift - Rock Sequences
Rock sequences in South America, Africa, India, Antarctica, and Australia show remarkable similarities. Wegener showed that the same three layers occur at each of these localities. The bottom (oldest) layer is called tillite and is thought to be a glacial deposit. The middle layer is composed of sandstone, shale, and coal beds. Glossopteris fossils are in the bottom and middle layers. The top (youngest) layer is lava flows. The same three layers are in the same order in areas now separated by great distances. Wegener proposed that the rock layers were made when all the continents were part of Pangaea. Thus, they formed in a smaller contiguous area that was later broken and drifted apart. 
Continental Drift - Glaciation
Glaciation in South America, Africa, India, and Australia is best explained if these continents were once connected. Glaciers covered all or part of each of these continents during the same time period in the geologic past. 
If the continents were in their present position, a major glaciation event that covered nearly all of the continents and extended north of the equator would be required. Geologists have found no evidence of glacial action in the northern hemisphere during this time period. In fact, during this time period, the climate in North America was warm. 
Wegener proposed that the continents were adjacent to each other during the glacial event. Therefore, glaciers spread over a much smaller area in the southern hemisphere and probably did not influence the climate of the northern hemisphere. 
Wegener used the distribution of specific rock types to determine the distribution of climate zones in the geologic past. For example, glacial till and striations (scratches on the rock), sand dunes, and coral reefs, indicate polar, desert, and tropical climates, respectively. The present climate zones are shown in the above figure. Note how the distribution of reefs, deserts, and glacial ice constrain the position of the rotational pole of the Earth. 
Using the distribution of rock types, Wegener reconstructed the distribution of climates zones at specific times in the geologic past. He found that, unlike the present distribution, in which zones parallel the equator, the past zones occupied very different positions. This implies that the rotational pole was in very different locations relative to today. Wegener proposed an alternative interpretation. He believed that the climate zones remained stationary and the continents drifted to different locations. The drift of the continents caused the apparent movement of the climate zones. 
Wegener used the distribution of climate zones to determine the location of the poles at different times in the geologic past. He found that the rotational pole appears to gradually change location, arriving at its present position only in the very recent geologic past. The apparent movement in the pole position over time is called polar wandering. Wegener offered an alternative explanation. He suggested that the poles remained stationary and that the continents changed their positions relative to the poles. 
Problems with Wegener's Model of Continental Drift
Wegener's model was not accepted by all geologists. Some thought that dispersion by winds or ocean currents could explain the distribution of fossil species. Other geologists thought the poles might wander and continents remain stationary. Many geologists thought Wegener's evidence was insufficient. 
The greatest shortcoming, at least in the eyes of American geologists, was the lack of an adequate mechanism for moving the continents. Wegener proposed that the Earth's spin caused the continents to move, plowing through the oceanic plate and producing mountains on their leading edges. Geologists at that time understood enough about the strength of rocks to know that this was highly unlikely. Wegener's work was largely unaccepted in the northern hemisphere. In the southern hemisphere, where geologists were familiar with the rocks that Wegener used to support his hypothesis, continental drift was generally accepted. 
A mechanism to move continents was proposed by Arthur Holmes, Scottish geologist in 1928. He believed heat trapped in the Earth caused convection currents, areas where fluids beneath the Earth's crust rise, flow laterally, and then fall. The currents would rise beneath continents, spread laterally, then plunge beneath the oceans. (Geologists now know that solid rock, not fluids, convect in the mantle). Unfortunately, Wegener died in 1930 while exploring the Greenland ice cap. He never had the opportunity to adapt Holmes' ideas to his views of continental drift.
Revival of the Continental Drift Hypothesis
During the 1940s and 1950s, great advances were made in our knowledge of the sea floor and in the magnetic properties of rocks. Both of these fields of study provided new evidence to support continental drift. 
Geologists have known for over a century that a ridge exists in the middle of the Atlantic Ocean. The Mid-Atlantic Ridge is 6,500 feet (2,000 m) above the adjacent sea floor, which is at a depth of about 20,000 feet (6,000 m) below sea level. In the 1950s, a seismologist, a scientist who specializes in the study of earthquakes, showed that the global system of mid-ocean ridges was also an active seismic belt, or zone of earthquakes. An international group of geologists proposed that the seismic belt corresponded to a trough, or rift, system similar to the trough known at the crest of the Mid-Atlantic Ridge. The rifts are about 20 miles (30 km) wide and 6,500 feet (2,000 m) deep. In all, the oceanic ridges and their rifts extend for more than 37,500 miles (60,000 km) in all the world's oceans. 
Sea-Floor Spreading
In 1962, a geologist presented an explanation for the global rift system. Harry Hess proposed that new ocean floor is formed at the rift of mid-ocean ridges. The ocean floor, and the rock beneath it, are produced by magma that rises from deeper levels. Hess suggested that the ocean floor moved laterally away from the ridge and plunged into an oceanic trench along the continental margin. 
A trench is a steep-walled valley on the sea floor adjacent to a continental margin. For example, ocean crust formed at the East Pacific Rise, an oceanic ridge in the east Pacific, plunges into the trench adjacent to the Andes Mountains on the west side of the South American continent. In Hess' model, convection currents push the ocean floor from the mid-ocean ridge to the trench. The convection currents might also help move the continents, much like a conveyor belt. 
As Hess formulated his hypothesis, Robert Dietz independently proposed a similar model and called it sea floor spreading. Dietz's model had a significant addition. It assumed the sliding surface was at the base of the lithosphere, not at the base of the crust. 
Hess and Dietz succeeded where Wegener had failed. Continents are no longer thought to plow through oceanic crust but are considered to be part of plates that move on the soft, plastic asthenosphere. A driving force, convection currents, moved the plates. Technological advances and detailed studies of the ocean floor, both unavailable during Wegener's time, allowed Hess and Dietz to generate the new hypotheses. 
Testing the Sea-Floor Spreading Hypothesis
Before being widely accepted, a new hypothesis must be tested. One test for the sea-floor-spreading hypothesis involved magnetic patterns on the sea floor. 
In the late 1950's, scientists mapped the present-day magnetic field generated by rocks on the floor of the Pacific Ocean. The volcanic rocks which make up the sea floor have magnetization because, as they cool, magnetic minerals within the rock align to the Earth's magnetic field. The intensity of the magnetic field they measured was very different from the intensity they had calculated. Thus, the scientists detected magnetic anomalies, or differences in the magnetic field from place to place. They found positive and negative magnetic anomalies. Positive magnetic anomalies are places where the magnetic field is stronger than expected. Positive magnetic anomalies are induced when the rock cools and solidifies with the Earth's north magnetic pole in the northern geographic hemisphere. The Earth's magnetic field is enhanced by the magnetic field of the rock. Negative magnetic anomalies are magnetic anomalies that are weaker than expected. Negative magnetic anomalies are induced when the rock cools and solidifies with the Earth's north magnetic pole in the southern geographic hemisphere. The resultant magnetic field is less than expected because the Earth's magnetic field is reduced by the magnetic field of the rock. 
When mapped, the anomalies produce a zebra-striped pattern of parallel positive and negative bands. The pattern was centered along, and symmetrical to, the mid-ocean ridge. 
A hypothesis was presented in 1963 by Fred Vine and Drummond Matthews to explain this pattern. They proposed that lava erupted at different times along the rift at the crest of the mid-ocean ridges preserved different magnetic anomalies. 
For example, lava erupted in the geologic past, when the north magnetic pole was in the northern hemisphere, preserved a positive magnetic anomaly. 
In contrast, lava erupted in the geologic past, when the north magnetic pole was in the southern hemisphere, preserved a negative magnetic anomaly. 
Lava erupting at the present time would preserve a positive magnetic anomaly because the Earth's north magnetic pole is in the northern hemisphere. 
Vine and Matthews proposed that lava erupted on the sea floor on both sides of the rift, solidified, and moved away before more lava was erupted. If the Earth's magnetic field had reversed (changed from one geographic pole to the other) between the two eruptions, the lava flows would preserve a set of parallel bands with different magnetic properties. The ability of Vine and Matthews' hypothesis to explain the observed pattern of ocean floor magnetic anomalies provided strong support for sea floor spreading. 
Subduction
If new oceanic lithosphere is created at mid-ocean ridges, where does it go? Geologists had the answer to this question before Vine and Matthews presented their hypothesis. In 1935, K. Wadati, a Japanese seismologist, showed that earthquakes occurred at greater depths towards the interior of the Asian continent. Earthquakes beneath the Pacific Ocean occurred at shallow depths. Earthquakes beneath Siberia and China occurred at greater depths. After World War II, H. Benioff observed the same distribution of earthquakes but could not offer a plausible explanation. 
The movement of oceanic lithosphere away from mid-ocean ridges provides an explanation. Convection cells in the mantle help carry the lithosphere away from the ridge. The lithosphere arrives at the edge of a continent, where it is subducted or sinks into the asthenosphere. Thus, oceanic lithosphere is created at mid-ocean ridges and consumed at subduction zones, areas where the lithosphere sinks into the asthenosphere. Earthquakes are generated in the rigid plate as it is subducted into the mantle. The dip of the plate under the continent accounts for the distribution of the earthquakes. Magma generated along the top of the sinking slab rises to the surface to form stratovolcanoes. 
The Birth of Plate Tectonics
The new hypotheses of the early 1960s explained several puzzling sets of observations. All that remained was a synthesis of these hypotheses. 
The synthesis began in 1965 when Tuzo Wilson introduced the term plate for the broken pieces of the Earth's lithosphere. In 1967, Jason Morgan proposed that the Earth's surface consists of 12 rigid plates that move relative to each other. Two months later, Xavier Le Pichon published a synthesis showing the location and type of plate boundaries and their direction of movement. 
Since the mid-1960s, the plate tectonic model has been rigorously tested. Because the model has been successfully tested by numerous methods, it is now called the plate tectonic theory and is accepted by almost all geologists. 
Location of Plate Boundaries
Earthquakes and volcanoes, evidence of unrest in the Earth, help locate the edges of plates. Earthquakes are distributed in narrow, linear belts that circle the Earth. 
Some of these belts have only shallow (0-20 miles; 0-35 km) earthquakes, like the mid-Atlantic and east Pacific ridges. In contrast, earthquakes in other belts, like western South America and south-central Asia, are at shallow, intermediate (20-45 miles; 30-70 km), and deep (45-450 miles; 70-700 km) levels. 
Volcanoes are also distributed in long belts that circle the Earth. A dramatic example is the line of volcanoes that circles most of the Pacific Ocean. This belt is known as the "Ring of Fire" because it is the site of frequent volcanic eruptions. 
The distribution of earthquakes and volcanoes coincides at most locations. The Ring of Fire is an excellent example. Geologists believe that areas of intense geologic activity, indicated by earthquakes, volcanoes, and/or mountain building, mark the boundaries between lithospheric plates. The distribution of earthquakes, volcanoes, and mountain ranges define 7 large plates and 20 smaller plates. The Nazca and Juan de Fuca Plates consist of only oceanic lithosphere. The Pacific Plate is mostly oceanic lithosphere only a small slice of continental lithosphere in southern California and Baja Mexico. Most of the other plates consist of both oceanic and continental lithosphere. 
Types of Plate Motion
The ways that plates interact depend on their relative motion and whether oceanic or continental crust is at the edge of the lithospheric plate. Plates move away from, toward, or slide past each other. Geologists call these divergent, convergent, and transform plate boundaries. 
At a divergent plate boundary lithospheric plates move away from each other. The mid-Atlantic Ridge, a topographically high area near the middle of the Atlantic Ocean, is an example of a divergent plate boundary. 
At a convergent plate boundary, lithospheric plates move toward each other. The west margin of the South American continent, where the oceanic Nazca Plate is pushed toward and beneath the continental portion of the South American Plate, is an example of a convergent plate boundary. 
At a transform plate boundary, plates slide past each other. The San Andreas fault in California is an example of a transform plate boundary, where the Pacific Plate slides past the North American Plate. 

*
2. Hot Spots and Mantle Plumes.
History of Concepts.
In the 1960s, geologists were seeking ways to prove or disprove the new idea of moving plates. Exploration of magnetic anomalies at mid-ocean ridges provided strong support for seafloor spreading . Geologists studied other ocean features to see how they related to plate tectonics. While visiting Hawaii, Tuzo Wilson, one of the founders of the theory of plate tectonics, noticed some interesting features about ocean islands. On a map of the Pacific basin, he found three linear chains of volcanoes and submarine volcanoes (seamounts). 
Although separated by thousands of miles, the three linear chains are parallel to each other. Of the three, the Hawaii-Emperor seamount chain was the most well known. Wilson reviewed the reports that had been published on these island chains and recorded the age of each island. An interesting pattern emerged. For each chain, the islands become progressively younger to the southeast. The extreme southeast end of each chain is marked by active volcanoes. 
Wilson proposed that the Hawaiian islands formed successively over a common source of magma called a hot spot. The Island of Hawaii is currently located above the hot spot. 
Hot, solid rock rises to the hot spot from greater depths. Due to the lower pressure at the shallower depth, the rock begins to melt, forming magma. The magma rises through the Pacific Plate to supply the active volcanoes. The older islands were once located above the stationary hot spot but were carried away as the Pacific Plate drifted to the northwest .
Convection.
Wilson thought the hot spot was located in the center of a mantle convection cell where movement was slow. The upper, faster moving part of the convection cell helped carry the Pacific Plate to the northwest. 
By the early 1970s, the plate tectonic theory and the presence of hot spots was generally accepted. In 1971, W. Jason Morgan suggested a more important role for hot spots. He proposed that hot spots result from hot, narrow plumes of material that rise from deep within the mantle. 
As the hot mantle plume reaches the base of the lithosphere, it spreads laterally. The laterally spreading of the hot mantle helped to move the Earth's rigid outer plates. In all, Morgan proposed 20 different hot spots, some located along mid-ocean ridges and others, like Hawaii and Yellowstone, located within plates. 
The Hawaiian - Emperor Volcanic Chain.
The Hawaiian - Emperor volcanic chain, one of the most dramatic features on the Earth, is the result of the drifting of the Pacific Plate over a fixed hot spot. 
The Hawaiian - Emperor volcanic chain extends nearly 3,750 miles (6,000 km) across the northwest Pacific Ocean. The volcanic chain is made of the Hawaiian Ridge and the Emperor Chain. The Hawaiian Ridge extends from Kilauea Volcano to Daikakuji Seamount, 2,183 miles (3,493 km) to the northwest, and includes the eight main islands and numerous smaller islands and seamounts. The Emperor Chain extends 1,454 mi (2,327 km) from Daikakuji Seamount to Meiji Seamount and trends almost directly north. The oldest seamount, Meiji, is about 75-80 million years. Since Meiji formed above the hot spot we know that the hot spot has been active for at least 75-80 million years, probably longer. The bend in the volcanic chain is the result of a major change in the direction of movement of the Pacific Plate about 43 million years ago. Since this change, the Pacific Plate has been moving to the northwest an average of 3-3.5 inches (8-9 cm) per year. 
Volcanism and geothermal activity at Yellowstone is caused by a hot spot.

*
3. Evolution of Hawaiian Volcanoes.

Background:
The age progression of the Hawaiian Islands was recognized by the early Hawaiians and incorporated into legends. Stearns (1946) recognized and defined the stages of development of the islands despite an incomplete knowledge of the submarine history of the volcanoes, accurate dating methods, and chemical data for the basalts. The stages recognized by geologists have undergone only minor modifications over the last few decades (Peterson and Moore, 1987).
The following pages describe the major stages and their key characteristics. 
Changes in the islands over the last 7.5 million years are also presented.


Stage 1

Stage 1 is the initial stage of development. Fissures or small vents open on the sea floor and produce pillow lava.

The volcano grows by adding layer upon layer of new pillow lava. Calderas are possible. Lava is alkalic in composition, with higher abundances of sodium and potassium relative to the tholeiitic basalts of the shield-building stage. 
Photograph of pillow lava by Gordon Tribble, U.S. Geological Survey.

Stage 2
Stage 2 is the shield-building stage. Hawaiian volcanoes are often referred to as "shield" volcanoes because their profiles resemble a warrior's shield. Lava is tholeiitic in composition. Major growth of the shield occurs because eruptions are voluminous and frequent. A summit caldera and rift zones form, and the volcano develops a shield shape. This stage is divided into three substages according to physical environment (Peterson and Moore, 1987).

Stage 2a.

Stage 2a is the submarine substage of the shield-building stage. Under deep ocean conditions, the weight of the overlying water does not allow the heat of the lava to generate steam. Lava erupts and forms pillows. The slopes of the volcano are steep.

Loihi is in the submarine substage of the shield-building stage. This perspective drawing from Malahoff (1987) shows the summit of the volcano. 
Features include: A. a southeast rift; B. a summit caldera that includes pit craters; and C. north rift zone.

Stage 2b.

As the top of the volcano approaches sea level, the weight of the overlying water is reduced, allowing water in contact with lava to turn to steam. The result is steam explosions that can fragment or shatter lava flows to form tephra and hyaloclastite material.

Tephra is any material ejected explosively from a volcano (ash, lapilli, cinder, and spatter). Hyaloclastite is a deposit of fine-grained, angular volcanic glass. Tephra and hyaloclastite accumulate until the vent is sufficiently above sea level to prevent interaction of sea water and lava. This photo shows lava entering the ocean over a wide front. Conditions are similar to those of a newly emerging island. 

Stage 2c.

During the subaerial shield-building stage aa and pahoehoe erupt from the summit area and rift zones. The volcano grows rapidly during this stage.

Because of the fluid nature of Hawaiian lava, it tends to travel far from the vent. This photo shows an early episode of the current flank eruption of Kilauea. About 90 percent of the surface of Kilauea has been covered by lava in the last 1,000 years. Photograph of Puu Oo lava flows by J.D. Griggs, U.S. Geological Survey, January 31, 1984.

The subaerial part of Hawaiian volcanoes is made of a stack of countless lava flows. For Kilauea volcano the top of the stack of flows is exposed in the walls of Halemaumau Crater and the caldera. 


Shields - Calderas.

Mauna Loa is a classic example of a shield volcano. As Hawaiian volcanoes grow, the weight of the lava flows pushes down on the hyaloclastite layer. In time, the hyaloclastite layer assumes a broad, sagging profile and acts as a plane of weakness in the volcano (Peterson and Moore, 1987). About 40 percent of the surface of Mauna Loa has been covered in the last 1,000 years.

Calderas may form, fill with lava, and reform throughout this stage. This photograph of Mokuaweoweo shows the summit caldera of Mauna Loa volcano. Mokuaweoweo formed about 700 years ago. Hualalai volcano is in the distance. Haleakala volcano is in the top-right corner of the photo.

Stage 3.

Stage 3 is the giant landslide stage. In the 1980s, the U.S. Geological Survey used sonar to map the sea floor surrounding the Hawaiian Islands. Geologists discovered about 70 major giant landslides that cover half of the flanks of the Hawaiian Ridge (Moore and others, 1989; 1994).


These landslides are among the largest on Earth, attaining lengths of 125 miles (200 km) and volumes of 1,200 cubic miles (5,000 cubic km). Moore and others (1989) identified two types of landslides: slumps and debris avalanches. Slumps moved on an overall slope >31/4, caused little disruption of the structural coherence of the volcano's flanks, and extended back to the volcanic rift zones and down to the base of the volcanic pile. Slumps may move slowly or surge abruptly forward several meters, causing large earthquakes. The 1868 and 1975 earthquakes, the largest of Hawaii's historic earthquakes, resulted from movement of the Hilina slump in south Hawaii.

Debris Avalanches.

This Gloria image shows the Nuuana and Wailua debris avalanches of the coasts of Oahu and Molokai, respectively. Debris avalanches moved on an overall slope <31/4, disrupted the flanks of the volcano to produce individual blocks, and formed amphitheaters at their heads and hummocky terrain in their lower parts. Debris avalanches are thin and long relative to slumps. Individual blocks within the hummocky terrain have diameters of 0.6 to 6 miles (1 to 10 km). Debris avalanches are single events that occur rapidly (Moore and others, 1989). Because of their rapid movement and large volume, debris avalanches generate tsunami. Tsunami caused by debris avalanches reached heights of 230 feet (70 m) on Molokai and 1,065 feet (325 m) on Lanai. 
The period of active landsliding occurs near the end of the shield-building stage because the volcano is growing at a rapid rate and has obtained its greatest height, producing steep slopes and maximum instability (Moore and Clague, 1992).

Stage 4.

Stage 4 is the capping stage. Alkalic basalt fills the summit caldera, if one is present, and produces a steep-sided cap at the summit of the volcano. Explosive eruptions may occur more frequently than in the shield-building stage. Time between eruptions gradually increases, and eventually eruptions stop.

Mauna Kea volcano is in the capping stage. The lower flanks of the volcano have not been affected by lava flows for 10,000 years. The summit and upper flanks of the volcano, part of which are shown in this photo, are covered by numerous cinder cones. The last eruption on the upper slopes of the volcano was 3,500 years ago. Between 5,000 and 3,000 years ago 20 percent of the upper slopes were covered by lava. 
Hualalai volcano is in the capping stage. About 20 percent of the volcano has been covered by lava in the last 1,000 years. Hualalai last erupted in 1801. Hualalai has erupted 200 times in the last 10,000 years thus suggesting an eruptive recurrence interval of about 50 years. 

Stage 5.

Stage 5 is the erosional stage. Erosion reduces the height of the volcano. As the island moves away from the hot spot and subsides, coastal areas are inundated by the sea. Fringing reefs develop around the edges of the island. As the island continues to subside and water depth increases, the reef dies due to lack of sunlight. A new reef grows in the shallow water, sometimes on top of the older, deeper reef. Streams and ocean waves produce valleys, canyons, and sea cliffs.

Erosion is evident at Waipio Valley on the east flank of Kohala, the oldest volcano on the island of Hawaii. Streams cut deep into the volcano during low stands of sea level. During high stands of sea level the valley floor was filled with sediment. 

This SPOT satellite image of the island of Oahu reveals the extensive erosion that has removed much of the material on the flanks of the Waianae and Koolau volcanoes. Note the stream valleys that reach the crest of the mountains. The resistant rocks mark the location of the rift zones of the volcanoes. Image courtesy of the European Space Agency and Hawaii Space Grant College, University of Hawaii.

Waimea Canyon on the Island of Kauai was produced by millions of years of erosion. 

Stage 6.

Stage 6 is the renewed volcanism stage. After periods of volcanic quiescence lasting as long as hundreds of thousands to even a million years, some Hawaiian volcanoes erupt alkalic volcanic products. Eruptions are sporadic and tend to be explosive, occurring at vents located away from the summit and rift zones. Volumes are low and eruptions are infrequent.

Diamond Head is a tuff cone that formed about 500,000 years ago. It is 9 miles (15 km) south of the rift zone of Koolau volcano which forms north and east Oahu. Nearly one million years had past after the shield-building stage before the renewed volcanism stage began. The most recent renewed volcanism on Oahu was 12,000 years ago. 

The Kalaupapa peninsula on the island of Molokai was formed during the renewed volcanism stage. The north flank of East Molokai volcano was removed by a giant landslide. Subsequent eruptions during the renewed volcanism stage made the peninsula. Ages for the Kalaupapa eruption vary from 1.24 million to 340,000 years.

Stage 7.

Stage 7 is the atoll stage. Subsidence and erosion reduce the island to sea level. Reefs continue to grow forming an atoll, a ring-shaped group of islands with an interior lagoon.

Sand Island (foreground) and Eastern Island (background) are part of the Midway Islands. These volcanoes were building their shields about 27 million years ago. Movement of the Pacific Plate has carried the islands 1,400 miles (2,200 km) northwest of the Hawaiian hot spot. The islands have subsided and eroded down close to sea level and are surrounded by coral reefs. 

Stage 8.

Stage 8 is the late seamount stage. The rate of regional subsidence exceeds the growth rate of the reef. The island sinks below sea level and becomes a guyot, a flat-topped seamount. The flat top of the guyot is produced by wave erosion.

Evolution of Hawaiian Volcanoes Present-Day Hawaii
The present-day appearance of the Hawaiian - Emperor volcanic chain was described in the lesson on Hot Spots and Mantle Plumes. A recent paper by Carson and Clague described the appearance of the islands in the recent geologic past. Carson, a biologist, was interested in when species arrived on the islands, and if they traveled down the island chain as new islands emerged. Clague, a geologist, reconstructed the history of the islands using drowned coral reefs that formed at sea level.

Seven and a half million years ago, the islands looked quite different. None of the islands that we are familiar with had yet been formed. Nihoa and Necker are small, low islands now, but 7.5 million years ago, they were major islands rising over 3,600 feet (1,100 m) above sea level. Islands on or near the hot spot are shown in gray (fresh lava). Older islands that have drifted off the hot spot are shown in red (weathered lava).

Five million years ago, Kauai was the easternmost island. Notice how Nihoa drifted to the northwest due to plate tectonics.

The island of Oahu formed about 2.5 million years ago. At that time, it was above the hot spot and was the easternmost island. Nihoa continued to drift northwest and became smaller as it subsided and was eroded.

One million years ago, Maui, Kahoolawe, Molokai, and Lanai were part of a single island, called Maui Nui. Notice that the newest island always formed at the same location.

At half a million years ago, the island of Hawaii consisted of a single volcano, 
Hawaii. Because Mahukona is now 3,600 feet (1,100 m) below sea level, it is not surprising that most people have never heard of it. It is hard to imagine that it was once an island 770 feet (235 m) above sea level.

The island of Hawaii that we are familiar with is less than half a million years old. The hot spot in the mantle continues to supply magma to Hualalai, Mauna Loa, Kilauea, and Loihi volcanoes.
The reconstruction of the appearance of the islands over the last few million years reminds us that the islands are constantly changing. The islands today's are a snapshot of events that have been occurring for the last 70 million years.

*
4. The Volcanoes of the Island of Hawaii.
Background.
The subaerial (under air, above sea level) portion of the Island of Hawaii is made of five volcanoes. From oldest to youngest, they are Kohala, Mauna Kea, Hualalai, Mauna Loa, and Kilauea. Each volcano can be recognized by its size, shape, and physical features. Two other volcanoes, Mahukona and Loihi, add to the submarine base of the island.

Kohala.
Kohala is the smallest volcano of the island and last erupted 60,000 years ago. Because of the long interval since the last eruption, geologists think that Kohala is probably extinct. Kohala is in the erosional stage. 
The northeast side of the volcano is deeply dissected, producing scenic valleys, like the famous Waipio Valley. This aerial view shows the steep walls and flat floor of the valley. The landslide at the base if the sea cliff probably occurred during the magnitude 7.9 earthquake in 1868. 
Mauna Kea
Mauna Kea ("white mountain") is the second largest volcano of the island and last erupted 3,500 years ago. Although Mauna Kea has not erupted in historical time, it probably will erupt again and is therefore considered dormant. 
Mauna Kea is in the capping stage and has slopes that are steeper than Mauna Loa's and Kilauea's. The lava and tephra from the capping stage filled any caldera that might have been present. There are no pronounced rift zones. The alignment of cinder cones suggests rift zones once extended to the west, south, and east. Gulches have developed on the northeast slope of the volcano. The other slopes are little affected by erosion. Light-colored areas on the upper slopes of the volcano are glacial deposits. Photograph of the southwest flank of Mauna Kea by Ed Wolfe, U.S. Geological Survey, 1988. 
Cinder cones and astronomical observatories are located at the summit of the volcano. 
Hualalai
Hualalai is the second smallest volcano. Hualalai erupted from its northwest rift zone in 1800-1801, sending lava to the ocean. Because Hualalai has erupted in historical time, it is considered an active volcano. Two other rift zones trend to the north and southeast. The resort town of Kailua is on the southwest flank of this volcano. 
Hualalai is in the capping stage. There are numerous cones and craters near the summit of the volcano. 
Mauna Loa.
Mauna Loa ("long mountain") is the largest volcano on Earth, rising over 30,000 feet (9,100 meters) above the sea floor and having a volume of nearly 9,700 mi3 (40,000 km3). The most recent eruptions were in 1975 and 1984. The 1984 eruption, as viewed from the summit of Kilauea, is shown in the above photo. 
Mauna Loa is in the shield-building stage. The summit caldera is named Mokuaweoweo, and rift zones extend to the northeast and southwest. About 14% of the surface of the volcano has been covered by lava in historical time, considered the last 200 years in Hawaii. The oldest exposed rocks are a couple of hundred thousand years old. This photo shows the climate and solar observatories that are on the upper north slope of the volcano. A large V-shaped barrier protects the observatories from future eruptions. 
Kilauea.
Kilauea ("spewing or much spreading," referring to volcanic eruptions) is the youngest volcano on the island. It has a shield shape, a summit caldera containing a pit crater named Halemaumau, and an east and a southwest rift zone. Kilauea has been erupting nearly continuously since 1983. About 90 percent of Kilauea's land surface is less than 1,100 years old. Because the surface of the volcano is so young, no streams have developed. The oldest exposed rocks are about 22,000 years old. The U.S. Geological Survey's Hawaiian Volcano Observatory and the National Park Service's Kilauea Visitor Center and Jaggar Museum are at the summit of the volcano. Digital map and map of Kilauea courtesy of U.S. Geological Survey. 
Movies of Kilauea:
The current eruption from Steve O'Mera. 
The current eruption from the videotape "Kilauea ERZ USGS Open File" 
Eruption of Kilauea 1959-1960 
Mahukona.
Mahukona ("leeward steam") was the first volcano to grow above sea level to form the Island of Hawaii. Moore and Clague (1992) estimated that the island emerged from the ocean about 800,000 years ago. At the end of the shield-building stage, about 465,000 years ago, the volcano was 770 feet (235 m) above sea level (Carson and Clague, 1995). Mahukona subsided to its present depth of 4,380 feet (1,335 m) at a rate of 0.09 in/yr (2.4 mm/yr) (Campbell, 1986). It is located directly west of Kohala.

Loihi.

Loihi ("long") is the youngest volcano to be part of the Island of Hawaii (Malahoff, 1987). The summit of Loihi is 3,178 feet (969 m) below sea level and 15 miles (28 km) southeast of the island. It is growing on the submarine flank of Kilauea. Loihi has a summit caldera that includes two pit craters. Rift zones trend to the northwest and southeast. Earthquakes indicate that Loihi is an active volcano. Map based on Seabeam data courtesy of U.S. Geological Survey.
Hawaii
The growth and evolution of the island was recently described by Moore and Clague (1992). In order of growth, the volcanoes that make the island and its submarine base are Mahukona, Kohala, Mauna Kea, Hualalai, Mauna Loa, Kilauea, and Loihi. Mahukona, Kohala, Mauna Kea, and Hualalai have completed their shield-building stage. The island has grown at an average rate of 0.008 mi2/yr (5 acres; 0.02 km2/yr) for the past 600,000 years. Moore and Clague estimated that 600,000 years was required for each volcano to grow from the ocean floor to the end of its shield building stage. 
Background information on the Evolution of the Hawaiian Volcanoes describes the stages of development and decline of a typical Hawaiian island.

*
5. Volcanic Landforms.

Mayon is a stratovolcano on the island of Luzon in the Philippines. Photograph copyrighted and provided by Steve O'Meara of Volcano Watch International.


Background:
Most volcanoes can be classified within a small number of features. These features are relatively easy to recognize and reflect how the feature formed and, in some cases, the tectonic setting of the volcano. The most common types of volcanic landfor ms are: shield volcanoes, stratovolcanoes, cinder cones, volcanic domes, volcanic spines, and lava plains.

Shield Volcanoes.

Mauna Loa is a classic example of a shield volcano. Hilo and Hilo Bay are in the foreground.

Shield volcanoes are made of thousands of thin basalt lava flows. Because the lava has a relatively low viscosity (low resistance to flow) the lava can travel far from the vent, the location where the lava reaches the surface. The resulting volcanic landform has a broad base and very gentle slopes, much like a warrior's inverted shield. This photo shows an aa lava flows that is about 7.5 miles (12 km) from its vent on the upper northeast rift zone of Mauna Loa. Note powerline poles for scale.

(Above) The comparison of the profile and size of a shield volcano and a stratovolcano. The volcanoes are drawn to the same scale.
Shield volcanoes are the largest volcanoes on Earth. Mauna Loa is over 30,000 feet (9,000 m) tall (from base to summit) and has a volume of more than 9,700 cubic miles (40,000 cubic km). At sea level, Mauna Loa is 60 miles (100 km) wide. The volume of a typical eruption is 0.05 cubic miles (0.22 cubic km).

The 1984 eruption of Mauna Loa produced long curtains of fire and large lava flows. However, the eruption was relatively non-violent (VEI=0) compared to those at stratovolcanoes.
Because of their basaltic composition, Hawaiian magmas have a low viscosity, and gases can escape prior to an eruption. Hawaiian eruptions are noted for their non-explosive nature and approachability. Hawaiian-type volcanoes are associated with hot spots, areas of unusually high heat flow and magma production in the Earth's mantle.

Stratovolcanoes.

Mount Hood is a stratovolcano in the Cascades of northern Oregon. 
Stratovolcanoes (composite volcanoes) are made of layers of tephra and lava flows.

The caldera at Crater Lake National Park cuts through the flanks of the former Mount Mazama stratovolcano, exposing layers of lava (dark layers) and tephra (light layers).

A layer of tephra on the flank of a Indonesian stratovolcano.

Layers of tephra on Usu, a stratovolcano in Japan. The crater to the left of the volcanologists was formed by the 1977-1978 eruption.

Basalt (left) is relatively rich in iron and magnesium and poor in silica. The high iron and magnesium content of the rock gives it a dark color. Andesite and dacite (right) are relatively poor in iron and magnesium and rich in silica. The low iron and magnesium content of the rock gives it a light color. The basalt is from Hawaii. The dacite is from Mt. St. Helens.

Violent (VEI=4) plinian eruption of Galunggung stratovolcano in Indonesia.

Andesite and dacite are the most common compositions at stratovolcanoes. Because andesite and dacite have higher concentrations of silica, the viscosity of the magma and the lava is high relative to basalt. The high viscosity (and also lower eruptio n temperature) of andesite and dacite magmas does not allow gas to readily escape from the magma. When the magma reaches the vent of the volcano, gas bubbles begin to form and to grow. The rapid expansion of the gas tears the magma apart, and the volcan o erupts violently, producing great volumes of ash. If enough gas escapes, the volcano can produce a sticky, slow-moving lava flow. Because the lava produced by composite volcanoes is so viscous, flows travel only a short distance from the vent before t hey solidifies. The volcano tends to grow both vertically and laterally, resulting in slopes that are steep compared to shield volcanoes. Stratovolcanoes are not as voluminous as shield volcanoes.

(Above) Mount Mayon, in the Philippines, is a classic example of a stratovolcano. Stratovolcanoes grow to a range of elevations. Nevado Ojos del Salado, a stratovolcano in the C hilean Andes, is the highest, with an elevation of 22,630 ft (6,900 m) above sea level.


The violent (VEI=5) 1980 eruption of Mount Saint Helens produced 0.1 cubic miles (0.5 cubic km) of ash. 
Stratovolcanoes are associated with subduction zones, areas where dense oceanic plates are pushed beneath more buoyant continental plates. The circum-Pacific region, also known as the Ring of Fire, is rimmed by subduction zones.

Cinder Cones.

Cinder cones are conical hills produced by the accumulation of cinders and other tephra. The cones can be up to 2,300 ft (700 m) in height, but most are between 100 and 1,000 ft (30 and 300 m). The cinder cone in the above photo is Puu Lilinue on Mauna Kea in Hawaii. 

The cones are produced by "fire fountains," low-energy eruptions that propel fragments of lava hundreds of feet into the air. The tephra accumulates in layers. This photo shows the Iilewa fountain during the 1955 eruption of Kilauea volcano, Hawaii. Note how cinders from the fountain are accumulating to make a cone adjacent to the vent. 

This photo shows the interior of Strawberry Knoll, a cinder cone in southwestern Utah. Some of the round-shaped clasts in the layer above the hammer are volcanic bombs. The layers in the upper half of the photo are made of cinders.

Cinder cones can be found on shield and stratovolcanoes and at divergent and convergent plate boundaries and hot spots. This photo shows a cinder cone on Kohala volcano in Hawaii. The cows in the foreground provide a scale. 

Lava Domes.

Mount Unzen in Japan is made of several coalesced volcanic domes. 

A volcanic dome is a steep-sided, rounded extrusion of highly viscous lava squeezed out from a volcano to form a dome-shaped, or bulbous, mass of congealed lava above and around the volcanic vent (Bates and others, 1980). 
A volcanic dome growing in the Mount St. Helens crater. 

Volcanic domes are commonly associated with stratovolcanoes. After the 1980 explosive eruption at Mount St. Helens, a volcanic dome began to grow within the crater. 

During the 1989-1990 eruption of Redoubt volcano in Alaska several lava domes grew and collapsed near the summit of the volcano. 

A volcanic spine is a pointed mass of solidified lava that sometimes occurs over the throat of a volcano (Bates and others, 1980). After the 1902 gas-rich eruption of Mount Pelee, Martinique, gas-poor magma rose from the vent to produce a steep-sided lava dome and a spine. Photo of Mount Pelee spine by A. Lacroix.

Flood Basalts.

Cross-sectional view of lava flows of the Columbia River flood basalts, part of the lava plains of the western United States. Columbia River in foreground. Note wake from small boat near left margin. 

Lava plains are flat sheets of basaltic rock. The lava that makes the plains was very fluid and traveled great distances from the vent. Lava plains are much flatter than shield volcanoes and can have volumes up to 47,000 cubic miles (195,000 cubic km). 

The Columbia River basalts cover parts of the states of Oregon, Washington, and Idaho and are a famous example of flood basalts that produced a lava plain.


*
6. Volcanic Landforms of Hawaii Volcanoes National Park.
Halemaumau, a pit crater, is a well known feature in Hawaii Volcanoes National Park. The floor of Kilauea Caldera surrounds Halemaumau. The caldera wall is in the distance. 
Background:
There are a large numbers of volcanic landforms in the national park that are common on shield volcanoes and on volcanic landscapes made of basaltic lava. Fortunately, most of these landforms are easily recognizable and have descriptive names. The b est way to learn these features is to use the photographs and list of definitions in the following sections. The photos are supplemented with figures and maps.

Caldera.
A caldera is a "large, basin-shaped volcanic depression, more or less circular ... the diameter of which is many times greater than that of the included vent or vents" (Bates and Jackson, 1980). Kilauea caldera is at the summit of Kilauea Volcano and has a diameter of 2 by 3 miles (4.5 km by 3 km). The caldera has been slowly filling by episodic eruptions since 1790. 
Aerial view of the summit of Kilauea Volcano. Halemaumau Crater, near the center of the photo, is the main vent inside Kilauea Caldera and is 0.6 miles (1 km) in diameter. The light-colored areas near the crater are mineral deposits that precipitated from gases. The dark lava flow to the east (just below) of the crater erupted in 1982. The road around the perimeter of the caldera is Crater Rim Drive. Jaggar Museum and the Hawaiian Volcano Observatory are located on Uwekahuna bluff, 470 feet (145 m) above the caldera floor, and can be seen in the upper right of the slide. Kilauea Iki Crater is on the bottom near the center. The buildings near the north rim of the caldera (right margin of the photo) are Kilauea Visitor Center (Park Headquarters) and the Volcano House Hotel. Volcano Village is at the bottom right corner of the photo. Note the change from forest to desert. 
Mokuaweoweo.
Mokuaweoweo caldera is at the summit of Mauna Loa Volcano. The caldera is 2.7 miles long by 1.6 miles wide (4.3 by 2.5 km). This photo is a view across Mokuaweoweo Caldera looking to the north. Immediately north and south of the caldera are pit cra ters, appropriately named North Pit and South Pit. 
Mokuaweoweo Caldera can also be seen from space. The Island of Hawaii is made up of five volcanoes: Kohala, Mauna Kea, Hualalai, Mauna Loa, and Kilauea. This space shuttle photograph shows the characteristic features of each volcano. On the north flank of Kohala Volcano, just to the west (right) of the clouds, lies deeply eroded Pololu Valley. Light colored glacial deposits cap the summit of Mauna Kea Volcano. The 1800-1801 lava flows are clearly visible on the northeast rift of Hualalai Volcano. Historical lava flows drape the northeast and southwest rift zones of Mauna Loa Volcano. Most of Kilauea Volcano is obscured by clouds, except for the southwest rift zone. Courtesy of NASA and the Hawaii Space Grant College, University of Hawaii.
Pit Crater.
A pit crater is a "crater formed by the sinking in of the surface; not primarily a vent for lava" (Macdonald and Abbott, 1977, p. 419). The upper segment of the east rift zone of Kilauea Volcano is defined by several pit craters. Most of these pit craters can be seen along the Chain of Craters Road. Makaopuhi Crater, shown in this photo, is 1 mile by 0.6 mile (1.5 km by 1 km) and is about 500 feet (150 m) deep. Lava flows from the Mauna Ulu eruption (1969-1974) are at the upper right. This pit crater is estimated to be 500 years old (J.P. Lockwood, personal communication, 1979, in Hazlett, 1990).
Rift Zone.
In Hawaii, a rift zone is a "zone of volcanic features associated with underlying dike complexes" (Bates and Jackson, 1980, p. 538). Magma leaves a storage area beneath the summit of the volcano and intrudes the rift zone at a depth of 0.6-3 miles (1 to 5 km). The intrusions are vertical and tabular, typically 5-10 feet (2-3 m) in width and 1.2 miles (2 km) in height. These planar, tabular-shaped intrusions of liquid magma are called dikes. They are also called dikes after the magma solidifies. The intrusion of magma causes the volcano to grow laterally. Intrusions can also cause cracking at the surface. This photograph is an aerial view of the southwest rift zone of Kilauea Volcano. The view is to the northeast. Crater Rim Drive is near the top of the slide. The darker lava flows are from the September 1971 eruption. The brown tephra seen within the cracks is from the explosive eruption of 1790. The cracks develop as magma passes beneath the surface, causing the surface to extend.
Cinder Cone.
A cinder cone is a "conical hill formed by the accumulation of cinders and other pyroclasts, normally of basaltic and andesitic composition" (Bates and Jackson, 1980, p. 112). Cinders are a type of pyroclastic material. Puu Puai, shown in this photo, is a cinder cone that formed during the 1959 eruption at Kilauea Iki Crater. Gas leaving the magma propelled incandescent cinder and ash as high as 1,900 feet (580 m) above the vent. Tradewinds blew the tephra to the southwest, where it accumulated to form the cinder cone. Puu Puai is visible from Crater Rim Drive and from Devastation Trail. 
Puu Oo is a cinder and spatter cone created by fountaining eruptions from 1983-1986. Cinder can be seen falling from a Puu Oo lava fountain in this photo.
Spatter Cone.
A spatter cone is a "low, steep-sided cone of spatter built up on fissure or vent; it is usually of basaltic material" (Bates and Jackson, 1980, p. 598). Spatter is globs of lava thrown through the air. The spatter cone in this photo formed during t he April 30, 1982, eruption near Halemaumau Crater. Numerous spatter cones formed along a 0.3 mile (0.5 km) fissure that was active for 20 hours. These spatter cones can be visited by walking beyond the Halemaumau Crater overlook to the intersection of Halemaumau and Byron's Ledge trails. 
A spatter rampart is a " ridge of congealed pyroclastic material, usually basaltic, built up on a fissure or vent" (Takahashi and Griggs, 1987). Pyroclastic refers to fragmented volcanic material ejected from a volcano. A vent is an opening at the Earth's surface through which volcanic material is extruded. The spatter rampart shown in this photo was the principal vent of the 1984 eruption on the northeast rift zone of Mauna Loa Volcano.
Littoral Cone.
A littoral cone is a "cone formed on a lava flow when it runs into a body of water, usually the sea. Such cones are the result of steam explosions that hurl into the air large amounts of ash, lapilli, and small bombs derived from the new lava" (Bates and Jackson, 1980, p. 365). During the Kupaianaha eruption, lava tubes advanced to the coastal area of the park and dumped lava into the ocean. The resulting steam explosions generated spatter, limu o Pele, and Pele's hair that accumulated on the sea cliff to make a littoral cone. This photo shows a littoral cone that formed in October 1988. Lava from the tube added new land, extending the coastline and isolating the littoral cone. Subsequent slumping of the new land produced the low fault scarp in front of the cone. Fresh lava flows covered the down-dropped area. The yellow areas near the cone are covered by sulfur that precipitated from volcanic gases.
Lava Pond.
A perched lava pond is an "impounded body of pahoehoe lava whose margins consist of chilled lava-flow fronts or spatter ramparts formed earlier in the same or previous eruption. The surface of the pond is thus retained at a higher (perched) level one or more meters above the surrounding surface" (Takahashi and Griggs, 1987). This photo shows a lava pond on the north flank of the Mauna Ulu satellite shield on the upper east rift zone of Kilauea Volcano. The diameter of the pond is 425 ft (130 m). Park visitors can see this perched lava pond by walking one mile (1.6 km) on the Napau Crater trail and climbing Puu Huluhulu, a prehistoric cinder cone.
Lava Tube.
A lava tube is a "hollow space beneath the surface of a solidified lava flow, formed by the withdrawal of molten lava after the formation of the surficial crust" (Bates and Jackson, 1980, p. 353). Nahuku (Thurston) lava tube is on Crater Rim Drive and visited by millions of park visitors every year. The lava tube is up to 13 ft (4 m) in height and about one mile in length. The lava tube developed about 400 years ago and carried lava away from a vent near the present location of Kilauea Iki Crater.
Tumulus.
A tumulus is a "doming or small mound on the crust of a lava flow, caused by pressure due to the difference in rate of flow between cooler crust and more fluid lava below. Unlike a lava blister ... it is a solid structure" (Bates and Jackson, 1980, p. 669). The tumulus shown in this photo is on the south flank of Kilauea Volcano.
Fissure.
A fissure is a "surface of fracture or a crack in rock along which there is a distinct separation" (Bates and Jackson, 1980). A fissure eruption is an "eruption that takes place from an elongate fissure rather from a central vent" (Bates and Jackson, 1980). The fissure in this photograph was a vent for an early episode of the Puu Oo eruption. Lava trees are prominent on the horizon. Spatter covers the ground adjacent to the fissure. Lava within the fissure is red, due to oxidation.
Fault.
A fault is a surface along which rocks slide past one another. A fault scarp is a "steep-slope or cliff formed directly by movement along a fault and representing the exposed surface of the fault before modification by erosion and weathering" (Bates and Jackson, 1980, p. 224). The motion of faults is described in a relative sense. The hanging wall is the "overlying side of an orebody, fault, or mine working; esp. the wall rock above an inclined vein or fault" (Bates and Jackson, 1980, p. 283). The footwall is the "underlying side of a fault ... esp. the wall rock beneath an inclined fault" (Bates and Jackson, 1980, p. 241). 
For most of the surface faults on Kilauea, the hanging wall has moved down relative to the footwall to produce a normal fault. Normal faults are common in areas that are undergoing extension. The fault scarps of the Hilina fault system are the major landforms in the coastal area of the park. These fault scarps are as high as 1,600 feet (490 m), resulting of seaward movement of unsupported rocks over thousands of years. Halape is on the coast along the right margin of the photo.

*
7.Lava.

Pahoehoe near the coast of Kilauea. 

Background:
There are three types of lava and lava flows: pillow, pahoehoe, and aa. Pillow lavas are volumetrically the most abundant type because they are erupted at mid-ocean ridges and because they make up the submarine portion of seamounts and large intraplate volcanoes, like the Hawaii-Emperor seamount chain. Pahoehoe is the second most abundant type of lava flow.

Pillow Lava.

Eruptions under water or ice produce pillow lava. James Moore of the U.S. Geological Survey made the first underwater observations of the formation of pillow lavas (Moore and others, 1973). Moore and his coworkers studied lava from the Mauna Ulu eruption. They described pillow lavas as elongate, interconnected flow lobes that are elliptical or circular in cross-section (Moore, 1975). This photo shows pillow lava forming off the south coast of Kilauea volcano, Hawaii.

Coastal Flows.

Lava flows near the coast tend to spread out laterally and enter the ocean over a large front. Several lava tubes may be active across the flow front. Larger lava tubes feed down slope and maintain pressure in the growing lobes that extend into the water. Flow lobes develop most readily on steep slopes and result in stacks of pillow "tongues" that parallel the offshore slope. This offshore stack of lava produces beds of rubble parallel to the offshore slope. Geologists call these steeply dipping beds foreset beds.

On November 8, 1992, lava entered the ocean just east of the archeological sites at Kamoamoa on the south flank of Kilauea volcano. By the end of the month, nearly all of Kamoamoa was buried under lava. By May 1993, a lava delta had extended the coastline about 1,600 feet (500 m) to the south. This aerial view is to the west.

The foreset beds are part of a lava delta that grows towards the ocean and provides a platform on which subaerial lavas can extend, thus adding new land to the island. However, some lobes are not continuous and break apart to form pillow sacks, thus adding rubble to the flank of the volcano. The active front of a lava delta is called a bench. Like the delta, the bench is built on rubble. However, the bench is relatively unstable and can collapse, falling into the ocean (Mattox, 1993).

A bench collapsed at the Lae Apuki entry in April 1993, removing a block 690 feet (210 m) long, 46 feet (14 m) wide, and 26 feet (8 m) thick from the front of the delta. A visitor, standing on the bench at the time of the collapse, disappeared into the ocean. This aerial view shows an active bench adding new land out from the old sea cliff (bottom of photo). Dark areas are black sand.

Pillow Lava.

Pillow lavas are also found near the summit of Mauna Kea. These pillow lavas were produced by a subglacial eruption that occurred 10,000 years ago. The pillow is about 3 feet (1 m) in diameter and has a glassy rim. Figure 21.11 from Porter, 1987.

Pillow lavas can also form when flows enter a river or lake. The pillows in the photo formed in the Wailuku River above Hilo, Hawaii about 3,500 years ago. The round cobbles were transported by the river.

Aa lava on pahoehoe, Hilina Pali, Kilauea. "Pahoehoe" and "aa" are Hawaiian words first introduced into the geologic literature by Dutton (1884).

Pahoehoe lava, Kilauea, Hawaii. Pahoehoe lava is characterized by a smooth, billowy, or ropy surface. A ropy surface develops when a thin skin of cooler lava at the surface of the flow is pushed into folds by the faster moving, fluid lava just below the surface.

Lava Tubes.

Photo of volcanologist looking through a skylight to see inside of a lava tube. 
Pahoehoe flows can evolve into lava tubes. One way that tubes form is by the crusting over of channelized lava flows. As the crust on a flow becomes thicker, it insulates the lava in the interior of the flow. The lava drains down slope and feeds th e advancing front or flows into the ocean. When the eruption stops or the vent is abandoned, the lava drains from the tube. Thurston lava tube is an excellent example of a lava tube. The rock surrounding a lava tube serves as a insulator to keep the lava hot and fluid. Because the lava remains hot, it can travel great distances from the vent. For example, tube-fed pahoehoe lava traveled 7.3 miles (11.7 km) from the Kupaianaha vent to the village of Kalapana (Mattox and others, 1993).

Pahoehoe flows tend to be relatively thin, from a few inches to a few feet thick. Road cuts and craters expose stacks of lava flows that make the volcano.

Aa Flow.

Aa is characterized by a rough, jagged, spinose, and generally clinkery surface. Aa flows advance much like the tread of a bulldozer. This photo is looking across an aa channel. Note the character of the aa that makes the wall of the channel.

Front of an advancing aa flow from the 1984 eruption of Mauna Loa. The molten core of an aa flow is visible.

Interior of an aa lava flow. Note dense interior and rubble at base and top. The interior of the flow is molten and several feet thick. The molten core grades upwards and downwards into rough clinkers. As the flow advances, clinker on the surface is carried forward relative to the molten interior. The clinkers continue to move forward until they roll down the steep front. The clinkers are then overridden by the molten core. Aa lava flows tend to be relatively thick compared to pahoehoe flows. Aa flows from the 1984 Mauna Loa eruption ranged from 6 to 23 feet (2-7 m) in thickness.


Unlike the advancing front of a pahoehoe flow, which is fed by a lava tube, an advancing aa flow is fed by a channel (Lipman and Banks, 1987).

Channel feeding aa lava flow, 1984 eruption of Mauna Loa

During the early episodes of the current eruption, aa flows up to 36 feet (11 m) thick surged through the Royal Gardens subdivision at rates as great as 108 ft/min (33 m/min)(Neal and Decker, 1983). The molten core of the flow is exposed. Note vehicles for scale.

Pahoehoe and Aa Flows.
Since the mid-1800s, geologists have tried to explain the causes of pahoehoe and aa lava. Several factors were offered to explain the transition: impediment of flow by obstacles, flowage during cooling, quantity of lava, conditions under the flow, and deep cooling. In the last few decades, with careful observations of numerous lava flows, geologists have reached a better understanding of the transition of pahoehoe to aa. One important influence is the viscosity of the lava. Viscosity is the resistance of a fluid to flow. For example, molasses has a higher viscosity that water. The following paragraphs outline some of the more important observations on the transition of pahoehoe to aa.

Pahoehoe lava crossing Chain of Craters Road. A study by Macdonald (1953) noted several generalizations concerning the transition from pahoehoe to aa:
Pahoehoe and aa can be found as parts of the same lava flow, with no significant difference in chemical composition between the two forms.
Pahoehoe may change to aa, but never the reverse.
Most active pahoehoe flows are less viscous and have higher temperatures than aa flows.
Vesicles in pahoehoe tend to be spheroids, whereas those in aa tend to be irregularly shaped, suggesting deformation caused by continued movement during final stages of solidification.
Even though aa tends to be more viscous, molten lava of approximately the same initial viscosity may form either pahoehoe or aa.
In addition to the effects of increasing viscosity, lava tends to change to aa when subjected to flow turbulence and internal shearing, such as during fountaining, flowing down steep slopes or over precipices, or during prolonged flowage for great distances. Macdonald concluded that a critical relationship between viscosity and the amount of internal disturbance due to flowage determines whether pahoehoe or aa is formed. 

Pahoehoe.

Pahoehoe lava at night. Steve Mattox, October, 1990.
A more recent paper by Peterson and Tilling (1980) included the rate of shear strain as a measure of Macdonald's internal shearing. An example of rate of shear strain is how quickly or slowly force is applied across a deck of cards. Factors influencing viscosity or rate of shear strain are listed below:
Viscosity rate of shear strain.
Temperature flow velocity and duration.
Gas content flow dimensions.
Lava vesicularity ground slope.
Crystallinity channel configuration.

Peterson and Tilling (1980, p. 273) suggested two general conditions that determine whether pahoehoe or aa forms:
If lava slows, cools, and stops in direct response to the corresponding increase in viscosity only, it retains its pahoehoe form.
If lava is forced to continue flowing after a certain critical relationship between viscosity and rate of shear strain is achieved, the lava changes to aa. 

Pahoehoe on black sand, Kamoamoa. 
Peterson and Tilling called this critical relationship the "transition threshold." They found that if the rate of shear strain is high, the transition threshold is reached at a lower viscosity than if the shear strain rate is low. The converse is also true. If the viscosity of the lava is high, a relatively low rate of shear strain may achieve the transition threshold, and the lava changes to aa.

*
8. Tephra.
The Puu Oo cone, the main vent for Kilauea from 1983-1986, is made of cinder and spatter from numerous lava fountains. 
Background: -- Tephra 
Three things come out of volcanoes: lava, tephra, and gas. Keeping that in mind makes classifying volcanic materials much easier. 

This lesson describes tephra. Tephra is all ejecta blown through the air or water by explosive volcanic eruptions. The size of the volcanic particles is the primary basis for subdivision. 
The terminology and particle size limits were originally defined by Fisher (1961): 

Bombs.
Bombs are clots of magma that measure between 64 mm and 256 mm in maximum dimension and are partly or entirely plastic when erupted. The shape of the bomb reflects the initial fluidity of the magma, the length and velocity of flight, the rate of cooling, the rate of expansion of vesicles (air bubbles), and deformation on impact. The shape of a bomb is used for classification and include spheroidal, spindle-shaped, ribbon, and breadcrust. The lava bombs shown in this photograph are from Hale Pohaku, Mauna Kea Volcano. 
Bomb from Puu Kawaiwai, Kohala, Hawaii. 
Blocks.
Blocks are erupted fragments of solid rock that measure more than 256 mm in maximum dimension. There are two types of blocks. Accessory blocks are formed from rocks from previous eruptions of the same volcano. Accidental blocks are rocks torn from the subvolcanic crust or mantle. Blocks are commonly angular and roughly eqidimensional. In 1924, a lava lake in Halemaumau Crater drained to a very deep level. The removal of the lava allowed groundwater to seep toward the crater and contact hot rock. Steam blasts resulted and hurled blocks up to 17,600 pounds (8,000 kg) in weight up to 3,600 feet (1,100 m) from the crater. The 1924 blocks shown is this photo can still be seen along Crater Rim Drive near the crater. 
Accessory blocks composed of trachyte make part of the tephra at the Puu Waawaa cone on Hualalai volcano. 
Lapilli.
Lapilli are fragments of magma, accessory, or accidental material between 2 to 64 mm in maximum dimension that are ejected from a volcano. Tephra derived directly from erupting magma is termed juvenile. Accretionary lapilli are spheroidal, concentrically layered pellets of ash. In 1790, an explosive eruption occurred at the summit of Kilauea. The eruption was driven by gas leaving the magma and from steam explosions. Rain passed through the ash cloud, and particles adhered together to form accretionary lapilli. The accretionary lapilli is this photo form a thin layer in the Kau Desert on the trail to Mauna Iki. 
The footprints of Hawaiian warriors are preserved in a layer of ash and accretionary lapilli in the Kau Desert southwest of the summit of Kilauea. 
Cinders.
Cinders are glassy particles that contain vesicles. Cinders are abundant at Puu Puai, the cone produced by the 1959 eruption at Kilauea Iki, and along Devastation Trail. The cinders in this photo are from the 1982 fissure eruption near Halemaumau. 
Bombs and cinder exposed in a quarry wall at Puu Kawaiwai, Kohala, Hawaii. 
Ash.
Ash is unconsolidated tephra less than 2 mm in diameter. It can be juvenile, accessory, or accidental in origin. It can be further divided into vitric, crystal, and lithic ash, based on the abundance of glass, crystals, or rock fragments, respectively. This photo shows the ash that is abundant in the deposit from the 1790 eruption of Kilauea. 
The above classification of tephra is based on particle size. Additional terms commonly used for volcanic products are based on texture and composition. 
Scoria.
Scoria is the vesicular ejecta of mafic lavas. Mafic simply means that the lava or magma is rich in iron and magnesium and poor in silica. Scoria is commonly in the size range of lapilli to bombs and is black, red, or brown in color. Because basalt, a mafic lava or rock, is the most common type of lava in Hawaii, scoria is a good general term for most Hawaiian tephra. 
Pumice.
Pumice is the term applied to vesicular ejecta of feldspathic lava. Feldspathic means that a lava or magma is poor in iron and magnesium and rich in silica. Because of the lower iron and magnesium content of pumice, it commonly has a lighter color than scoria. Pumice has a lower density and a vitreous luster (i.e., looks like a broken glass bottle). It is produced during explosive eruptions of some stratovolcanoes. It can float on water for prolonged periods because the walls of the vesicles are generally intact and very numerous. This photo shows a pumice deposit from a 1980 pyroclastic flow at Mount St. Helens. Note person holding pumice boulder. 
Pumice deposit from a 1980 pyroclastic flow at Mount St. Helens. Note the light color of the pumice which is caused by its relatively high silica content. 
Thread-lace scoria.
Thread-lace scoria, also called reticulite, is produced by extreme vesiculation of basalt, resulting in scoria with bubble walls as thin as thread. The porosity, or open space, is up to 98 percent. The reticulite in this photograph was collected from Hilina Pali Road after being carried westward by the wind during the Mauna Ulu eruption, 1969-1974. 
Close-up view of reticulite. The large rings have a diameter of about one-fourth of a millimeter. 
Other Types of Tephra.
Other types of tephra are also common in Hawaii. Pele's hair is naturally spun volcanic glass that is blown away from lava fountains, cascading lava falls, or turbulent lava flows. Pele's hair is gold in color and has a diameter of less than half a millimeter. 
Pele's tears are solidified drops of volcanic glass. Pele's tears range in size from millimeters to a few centimeters and can be trailed by Pele's hair. Pele's tears can be tear-shaped, spherical, or nearly cylindrical. The Pele's tears in this photograph were collected from Hilina Pali Road after being carried westward by the wind during the Mauna Ulu eruption, 1969-1974. 
Limu O Pele is sheets of volcanic glass produced when channelized lava or lava from tubes enters the sea. Under certain conditions, water is forced into the lava and becomes incorporated in the flow. The water is converted to steam. The expansion of the steam produces a bubble with a wall made of lava. The bubble continues to grow until the wall becomes too thin and solidifies. The glass bubble then bursts, and limu o Pele is dispersed by the wind. 
Limu O Pele seldom survives as large sheets. As limu o Pele is dispersed by the wind it shatters into thousands on tiny glass fragments. 
Spatter.
Spatter is an accumulation of very fluid pyroclasts, coating the surface around a vent. Spatter landed on this tree during the 1973 eruption on the south flank of Kilauea. 
Spatter along the fissure for the November 1973 eruption of Kilauea. Quarter for scale. 

*
9. The current eruption of kilauea volcano.
Photo of the "fire hose" flow, a small lava tube pouring into the ocean. 
Background: 
The current eruption of Kilauea Volcano is the most long-lived and voluminous rift zone eruption in Hawaii in historical time. The eruption has provided volcanologists with exceptional opportunities to better understand how volcanoes work. It has also reminded residents about the hazards of living on an active volcano. 
This description is presented in short paragraphs that describe important events in the history of the current eruption. Details of the first 20 episodes of the eruption are given in Wolfe and others (1987, 1988). A general summary and very readable account of the eruption is given by Heliker and Wright (1991a). Numerous summaries are given in VolcanoWatch , a weekly publication by the Hawaiian Volcano Observatory. The U.S. Geological Survey recently published a CD-ROM that contains 475 photographs of the eruption from 1983-1993 (Takahashi, T.J., Abston, C.C., and Heliker, C.C. (1995). 
The current eruption is divided into episodes. An episode is a volcanic event that is distinguished by its duration or style. Episodes are commonly separated by a period of repose during which there is no lava at the surface. To date (February 1996), there have been 53 episodes. They have lasted from less than 24 hours to several years. Keeping track of all these episodes, especially after Episode 49, can be confusing, even if you are a volcanologist. A table is provided that summarizes episodes, major events, and dates. 
To make it easier to learn about this long eruption, its history is divided into several different periods. Each period correspondence to significant changes in the style of eruption, location of the active vent(s), and/or impact of the eruption on people and places. 
Start of the Eruption: 1983.
Map of topographic, volcanic, and cultural features of the East Rift Zone and south flank of Kilauea volcano. Modified from Clague and Heliker (1992). 
1. Kilauea caldera 
6. Kamoamoa
11. Highway 130
2. Chain of Craters Road
7. Wahaula
12. Highway 11
3. Puu Oo
8. Lae Apuki
13. Pauahi Crater
4. Kupaianaha
9. Kapaahu
14. Mauna Ulu
5. Royal Gardens
10. Kalapana

On the early morning of January 2, 1983, the summit of Kilauea began to deflate, and the number and size of earthquakes increased in the volcano's east rift zone. The earthquakes started near Mauna Ulu and migrated down right to Napau Crater and Puu Kamoamoa. 
Geologists interpreted the swarm of earthquakes to be a result of magma breaking rock as it is forced into the rift zone and then moved towards the surface. 
Shortly after midnight on January 3, 1983, lava was sighted near Napau Crater. Seismic instruments also recorded an increase in the amount of harmonic tremor, the earthquake pattern that indicates magma movement and eruption. Over the next nine hours, a discontinuous line of the eruptive fissures extended 4 miles (6 km) down the rift (see above photo). Near the end of this activity the eruption became concentrated in the vicinity of Puu Kamoamoa. Subsequent eruptive activity was located at several different vents and varied in duration from less than an hour to almost one day. The photograph shows a line of fissures about 0.9 km long. Lava flows are extending to the north and south. View is to the southeast. 
Geologists from the U.S. Geological Survey's Hawaiian Volcano Observatory monitored the eruption in many ways. This photo shows a geologist approaching a fissure to collect a sample of spatter for chemical analysis. 

Change to Central-Vent Eruptions
Episode 2 of the eruption began on February 10, and continued to March 4. The primary eruption site was then a central vent, rather than a series of fissures. This vent was called the 1123 vent, a name designated at the time of its first eruptive activity. Lava fountains from this vent reached a height of 260 ft (80 m). Episode 3 (March 21 to April 9, 1983) was also located at the 1123 vent. This episode had two lava fountains, one of which attained a height of 650 ft (200 m) near the end of the episode. The second, lower fountain, fed an aa lava flow that extended 4.4 miles (7 km) to the southeast and reached the Royal Gardens subdivision. 

Puu Oo: 1983-1986.

For 65 days following Episode 3, the volcano was quiet. On the morning of June 13, the level of tremor began to increase. By late morning, a line of discontinuous fountains 65 to 130 feet (20-40 m) high and 330 to 490 feet (100 to 150 m) long formed down rift from Puu Kamoamoa. The locus of major fountaining was at the "O" vent, a 65 foot (20 m) high spatter cone. The cone enclosed a crater that contained a lava lake (Wolfe and others, 1988). Lava fountains rose 100-165 feet (30-50 m) above the surface of the lava lake. Overflow of the lava pond established a river of lava that flowed to the southeast and extended to the west side of the Royal Gardens subdivision. This photo shows an aa flows that was surging through Royal Gardens at a rate of 100 feet (30 m) per minute. Note the stop sign. The flow buried roads but did not destroy homes. Activity stopped on June 17, 1983. The O-vent was later renamed Puu Oo. 

Puu Oo Lava Fountains.

Puu Oo lava fountains quickly developed an episodic pattern. Eruptive episodes ranged in duration from 9 hours to 4 days. The episodes were characterized by a high-volume discharge of lava flows, vigorous fountaining, rapid summit subsidence, and strong harmonic tremor in the vent area. Repose periods ranged in length from 8 to 51 days and were characterized by reinflation of the summit of Kilauea Volcano and weak harmonic tremor in the vent area (Wolfe and others, 1987). Near the end of the eruptions from the Puu Oo vent, activity became increasingly regular, with eruptive episodes lasting less than 24 hours separated by repose periods lasting about 25 days (Ulrich and others, 1987). 
Lava channels rapidly transported large volumes of lava away from the vent. 
Puu Oo (lower right) and the (mostly aa) lava flow field it produced. Royal Gardens subdivision is in the top right corner. 
During several eruptive episodes, aa flows reached the Royal Gardens subdivision. In 1983 and 1984, lava flows destroyed 16 homes. 
End of Eruptions from Puu Oo
In all, 44 episodes of high fountaining at the Puu Oo vent built a cinder-and-spatter cone 842 feet (257 m) high and covered 15 square miles (40 square km) with lava. Puu Oo is the largest new volcanic feature to form in the Hawaiian Islands in historical time. Puu Oo has remained active from 1986 to the present. During most of this time, a lava pond has covered part of the floor of the crater. 
The current eruption is an excellent example of a flank eruption. Summit eruptions at Kilauea are in or adjacent to the caldera (bottom center of photo). Since 1983, magma has left the reservoir beneath the caldera and traveled in the east rift zone about 12 miles (20 km) to supply the Puu Oo vent (top center of photo). Puu Oo is in a remote area. It can be seen in the distance from Highway 11 and Puu Huluhulu or by hiking Napau Crater Trail. 
Kupaianaha: 1986-1989 
In July 1986, just as it appeared that Puu Oo would start the 48th episode, magma began to erupt from new fissures at the base of the cone (Heliker and Wright, 1991). Another fissure opened 2 miles (3 km) down rift to form the Kupaianaha vent. Episode 48, sometimes called the Kupaianaha eruption, was to become the longest of all the eruptive episodes to date. 
A Change in Eruptive Style
With the change to the new vent, the style of eruption also changed. Unlike the discontinuous, high-fountaining eruptions of Puu Oo, Kupaianaha erupted continuously with gentle effusion of lava. A lava pond developed over the Kupaianaha vent. Repeated overflows of the lava pond built a 180-foot (55 m) tall shield in less than a year (Heliker and Wright, 1991). In this photo, the surface of the pond is covered by a thin crust of solidified lava. The Puu Oo cone is in the background. 

The cause of the change in eruptive style is a topic of continuing research. Prior to the eruption, a reservoir of magma existed in the east rift zone beneath the present location of the Puu Oo vent. This local reservoir may have played a role in triggering or sustaining fountaining episodes. No magma was stored in the rift zone below the site of the Kupaianaha eruption. The magma that arrived at Kupaianaha contained less gas because most of the gas escaped as the magma passed beneath Puu Oo. Gas is need to generate fountaining eruptions. Although volcanologists have numerous monitoring techniques, it can still be difficult to determine exactly what controls the behavior of a volcano. 
Lava Meets the Ocean
The Kupaianaha lava pond (just to the right of center on the skyline) provided a steady supply of lava to flows advancing toward the ocean. Lava flows crusted over or inflated to produce lava tubes. Lava tubes insulate the lava; thus, they remain fluid and can travel great distances (6.9 miles; 11 km in this photo) from the vent to the coast. The upper tube system is marked by a series of steaming areas. By late 1986, lava tubes reached the ocean near the small community of Kapaahu. Eleven homes were destroyed. In early 1987, lava flows traveled farther to the east and destroyed 14 homes in the Kalapana Gardens subdivision. In this photo, the Puu Oo cone is on the skyline to the left of center. Kupaianaha is the shield on the horizon near the right margin of the photo. Aa from the Puu Oo eruptions flowed down Pulama Pali. Some flows buried portions of the Royal Gardens subdivision. Note the roads and houses. Pahoehoe lava of the Kamoamoa flow field is on the left and bottom of the photograph. 
The upper part of the tube system is marked by a series of steaming areas. Kupaianaha is at the bottom of the photo. The steam plume produced by lava pouring from the tube into the ocean is in the top right corner. The distance from the vent to the ocean is about 6 miles (10 km). 
Thermal infrared map of the Kupaianaha flow field. The underground storage and transport of lava in the tube system is shown in yellow from the top to the bottom of the slide. The bright colored area at the bottom of the slide is the plume of hot water produced by lava entering the ocean. 
Lava continued to pour into the ocean from mid-1987 through 1989. During this period, several major lava tubes developed and broke down. New lava tubes and breakouts from developed lava tubes increased the size of the lava flow field. The interaction of lava and water generated an acidic steam plume, black sand, and, with the proper conditions, littoral cones. 
Wahaula heiau was constructed in the 13th century during a change to more strict worshipping rituals. Wahaula was the first luakini heiau and remained in use until 1819. In 1938, the Kalapana Extension Lands were added to Hawaii National Park. In 1965, the National Park built the Wahaula Visitor Center to interpret the cultural features of the coastal area. 
By June 1989, lava destroyed Wahaula Visitor Center. 
Subsequent flows surrounded Wahaula heiau (bottom center). Several homes in Hawaii Volcanoes National Park and the Royal Gardens subdivision were also overrun by lava. 

Kupaianaha: 1990-1991.
Activity continued at Kupaianaha in 1990. The depth to the surface of the pond had changed considerably compared to earlier in this episode. The increased depth may have been the result of lower pressure in the plumbing system of the volcano and/or thermal erosion of the bottoms of long-lived lava tubes. 
In 1990, a tube system extended the flow field to the east. Lava entered the coastal village of Kalapana in April and by August buried the entire village (Moulds and others, 1990; Mattox and others, 1993.) 
The next four photos show the progression of the lava flows. 
Lava first entered the Kalapana Gardens subdivision, 7.5 miles (12 km) from the Kupaianaha vent, in December 1986. AAA homes were destroyed. Fortunately, the tube system supplying this flow was abandon. 
By May 1990, much of the Kalapana Gardens subdivision was buried by pahoehoe flows. 
By August, the subdivision and the older part of Kalapana were destroyed. Kaimu Bay is in the bottom right. 
In September 1990, flows advanced into and filled Kaimu Bay. By February 1991, the tube system leading to Kaimu was abandoned. 
This oblique aerial view shows much of the same area seen as the above photograph. Kaimu Bay is filled with lava. The steam plume in the distance is in Hawaii Volcanoes National Park. 
Pauses in the eruption stopped the supply of lava to the tubes several times in 1990. When the eruption restarted lava followed old tubes but often encountered breakdowns that force large volumes of lava to the surface. 
In September, lava buried the famous black sand beach at Kaimu and filled the beautiful bay. This 1926 photo shows the black sand beach that made Kaimu famous. 
This 1990 photo shows Kaimu shortly before is was buried by lava. The beach was smaller due to subsidence of the coast line associated with large earthquakes. 
Lava had reached the east side of Kaimu by late July but made little progress in filling the bay. Unfortunately conditions changed on September 25. Almost overnight the bay was filled with lava, extending the coastline oceanward about 650 feet (200 m). 
The next two photos show the dramatic changes at Kaimu. 
View south from the end of Highway 130 to Kaimu Bay. A lava delta grows to the east from the west side of the bay. Note the short coconut tree behind the stop sign. 
The view across former Kaimu Bay in October 1990. Note the short coconut tree for reference. Note the steam plume in the distance. Lava later burned all the coconut trees down. 
From February 1990 to January 1991, 105 homes were destroyed by lava in the Kalapana area. 
Each day a geologist from the U.S. Geological Survey mapped the location of the lava flows and estimated the location of the flows in the next 24 and 48 hours. The geologist provided this information to Hawaii County Civil Defense which used it to coordinate evacuation efforts. 
In late 1990, a new lava tube developed and extended down the west side of the flow field. By March, lava was once again entering the ocean in Hawaii Volcanoes National Park (Heliker and others, 1991). 
Episode 49 and the End of the Kupaianaha Eruption: 1991-1992 
A line of fissures formed between Puu Oo and Kupaianaha in November 1991. During a three-week period, these fissures produced an aa flow that reached the Royal Gardens subdivision but caused no damage (Heliker and others, 1993; Mangan and others, 1995). This photo shows one the vents for episode 49. 
The activity at Kupaianaha declined throughout 1991. This episode was officially over on February 6, 1992, when no lava could be detected in the Kupaianaha system (Kauahikaua and others, 1992; Mattox and others, 1992). 
Episodes 50, 51, and 52, New Vents on the Flank of the "Old" Puu Oo Cone: 1992 

Eleven days after Kupaianaha shut down, a 490-foot (150 m) long fissure opened on the uprift (west) flank of the Puu Oo cone, and Episode 50 began. The flows formed a perched lava pond that covered about 0.4 square mile (1 square km). On March 3, 1992, an intrusion of magma entered the upper east rift zone of Kilauea, and Episode 50 stopped abruptly. 
Four days later, Episode 51 started from a fissure on the Puu Oo cone slightly higher than the Episode 50 fissure. Several new vents formed. Downslope from the vents, a lava shield, fed by a lava tube, developed and grew to a height of 200 feet (60 m). The lava shield was capped by a perched lava pond. The eruption at the Episode 51 fissure was punctuated with pauses in activity lasting from hours to days. In July, the lava pond drained and crusted over. The full volume of the eruption bypassed the pond and traveled to the south in a lava tube, reaching the pali (the steep slopes facing the coast) on the March 20, 1992. Lava poised at the edge of the pali and threatened numerous archaeological features in the park. Fortunately, a pause on July 22 stopped the advance of this flow. The episode restarted and paused several times from July to October 1992. Photograph of Episode 51 pond and overflows by T.N. Mattox, U.S. Geological Survey, April 4, 1992. 
On October 2, 1992, during a pause in Episode 51, a magnitude-4.5 earthquake occurred on the south flank of Kilauea volcano, not far from the eruption site. On October 3, Episode 52 started along a fissure on the south flank of the Puu Oo cone (shown in the above photo). A day later, activity resumed at the Episode 51 vent. Over the next two weeks, activity declined at the Episode 52 vent and increased at the Episode 51 vent. Activity was last seen at the Episode 52 vent on October 17. For the remainder of 1992, the Episode 51 vent remained active. Geologists at the U.S. Geological Survey's Hawaiian Volcano Observatory suggested that the October 2 earthquake may have changed the plumbing system near the eruptive vent. 
Close-up on the Episode 52 vent, a low lava fountain and adjacent spatter cone. Note lava channel just left of fountain. South flank of Puu Oo is on left center margin. 

Lava Buries Kamoamoa.

Kamoamoa was a beautiful green oasis along the mostly barren coast in the park. In 1986, a black sand beach formed at Kamoamoa. The sand was pieces of lava that fragmented when it poured from a lava tube into the ocean. Waves then transported the sand along the coast until it began to collect in a sheltered area, making the beach. 
Kamoamoa was also an important archeological area that provided insights into how the Hawaiians lived. This photo is of a Moa heiau. 
This is an aerial view of Kamoamoa. Chain of Craters Road slants across the bottom of the photo. A large grassy field and picnic area is just inland (below) the beach. The short access road leads to the campground and a trail to the archeological sites. Note the indentation of the coast where the sand collected to make the beach. 
Lava from the Episode 51 vent reached Paliuli, just above the Chain of Craters Road, on November 3, 1992. This photo shows lava cascading over Paliuli on the night of November 3, 1992. Lava crossed the Chain of Craters Road on November 7. Within a day, lava skirted the eastern side of the Kamoamoa archaeological area and entered the ocean. The glow on the horizon marks the location of the vent. 
The flows spread along the black sand beach and began to build a lava delta out into the bay. This aerial view is to the east. Kamoamoa is just to the west (left) of the lava delta. The flows at the top of the photo are from Kupaianaha. 
Conditions were favorable to allow park visitors close access to lava flows and the new lava bench. Note visitors are standing on the old sea cliff, not the new lava bench which was unstable and prone to collapse. 
Large thin flows covered the grassy field at Kamoamoa in only a few hours. Conditions were safe for visitors to have a close look at lava. 
The flows burned away the bases on the coconut trees, producing tree molds. 
The presence of lava flows in such a heavily used area of the park brought new opportunities for interagency cooperation between the staff of the National Park Service and the U.S. Geological Survey. 
By the end of November, the Kamoamoa campground, picnic area, and most of the archaeological features were buried under lava. Even the black sand beach, which formed in 1986, was buried. The lava delta continued to grow. 
An unstable lava bench formed at the front of the lava delta. Collapse and settling of the lava bench produced dramatic steam explosions that propelled fragments of lava about 300 feet (100m) into the air through a breach in the lava tube (Mattox and others, 1993). 
By late December, 1993, the lava delta extended 980 feet (300 m) beyond the old shoreline and had added 60 acres (24 hectares) of new land to the island. 
Episodes 51 and 53: 1993 - present

On February 8, 1993, the eruption paused. Without lava from the Episode 51 vent, flows in the park stagnated. Activity resumed on February 16. Episode 53 began on February 20, 1993, as a new vent formed on the south side of the Puu Oo cone, adjacent to the Episode 52 vent, and sent lava flows to the south. These flows entered the tube system established by Episode 51. Both vents used the same tube system to deliver lava to the Kamoamoa area. 

By March 2, lava was again pouring into the ocean in the park. In early March, a rupture in the lava tube generated a flow that traveled along the west side of the flow field. This flow cascaded over Paliuli and crossed Chain of Craters Road 1,600 feet (500 m) west of the Kamoamoa flow field. The flow buried most of the archaeological features at Lae Apuki, the former site of a Hawaiian village, and entered the ocean on March 28, 1993. Puu Oo cone is in the top right of the photo. The east Kamoamoa entry is producing a large steam plume. The lava flows in the Lae Apuki area are west (left) of the Kamoamoa flow field. Chain of Craters Road is in the lower right. 
The lava bench that formed at Lae Apuki was very unstable. From the safety of the old coastline, rangers and visitors watched as portions of the bench collapsed into the ocean, exposing hot rocks or lava. The hot material generated steam explosions that hurled blocks of rock or spatter into the air. On the night of April 19, a piece of bench collapsed and carried a visitor into the ocean. His body was never recovered. Twenty-two other visitors were injured by flying rocks. Everyone was beyond the "area closed" signs posted by the park service. The tube system to Lae Apuki was abandoned by May 6, 1993. This photo of the east Kamoamoa lava entry shows small explosions caused by the interaction of lava and water. Spatter and black sand are thrown into the steam plume. Blocks of rock, thrown inland during the explosions caused by the bench collapse of April 19, are in the foreground. 

The Episode 51 and 53 vents continued to supply lava to a tube that reached the coastal area and ocean for the remainder of 1993 and through all of 1994. From February 1993 to February 1994 the volume of lava varied between about 200,000-400,000 cubic yards (150,000-300,000 cubic meters) per day. Visitors had many opportunities to watch the island grow. 

Late in 1993 collapse pits developed in the the flank of the Puu Oo cinder and spatter cone. One collapse pit was 100-120 feet (35-40 m) in diameter and consumed most of the spatter cone produced at the onset of Episode 53. 

Between October 1994 and April 1995 the eruption paused five times. After each pause lava reoccupied the tube system to about the top of Palama Pali. The lava then leaves the tube and travels on the surface to the ocean. Over time new tubes form on the pali and the coastal area. During this period lava entered the ocean at 15 different locations between Highcastle and Kamokuna. 
A skylight formed in the upper part of the lava tube system in July and revealed a 40 foot (12 m) wide river of lava 65 feet (20 m) below this surface. Since the tube formed near the surface, this observation indicated that the lava tube had melted the rock beneath it. The tube bifurcates near the top of Pulama Pali. One tube sent lava to an entry near Kamoamoa. The second tube supplied lava to an entry near the end of Chain of Craters Road. 
A pause in the eruption began on August 22. The eruption resumed on August 25 and flows broke out of the tube system at an elevation of 2,200 feet (670 m). These flows moved down the east side of the Kamoamoa flow field and entered the ocean on September 7. Unfortunately the flows and lava entries are about 3 miles (5 km) from the end of Chain of Craters Road and the national park has closed the area to visitors. Most of the lava enters the ocean near Kamokuna. 
In September the lava pond in Puu Oo was only 50 feet (15 m) across and at a depth of about 325 feet (100 m) below the rim of the crater. The pond is smaller and deeper than observed previously. 

Map simplified from October 20, 1995 Volcano Watch. 
Sometime between the evening of October 17 and noon on October 18 a large collapse removed part of a newly formed lava bench. The exposed hot rocks and lava from the tube generated steam explosions that threw material back on the bench to produce a littoral cone. The cone was 10 feet (3 m) tall and 50 feet (15 m) long. Collapse events are extremely dangerous and can happen at any time without warning. 
As of February 1996, the Episode 51 and 53 vents continue to supply lava to a tube system that empties into the ocean on the east side of the Kamoamoa flow field. A small lava pond is still active within the Puu Oo Crater. 
When possible, the rangers of Hawaii Volcanoes National Park provide access to lava flows in the coastal area. To check on recent viewing conditions click here, or call the park's eruption message at (808) 967-7977. 
For the latest information about the eruption visit the Hawaii Volcano Observatory homepage. 
The current eruption of Kilauea shows no signs of stopping in the near future.

Damage Caused by the Eruption 

As of February 1996, the current eruption has destroyed 181 homes. 
Buildings, structures, roads, trails, and facilities have been destroyed in Hawaii Volcanoes National Park and in Harry K. Brown county park. Numerous archaeological sites have been buried. 

Total losses exceed $61 million, making this eruption the most costly ever in Hawaii. 
More than 500 acres (200 hectometers) of new land has been added to the island. 1.7 billion cubic yards (1.3 billion cubic m) of lava has been erupted.

*
10.Minerals, magmas and volcanic rocks. 

Igneous rocks begin as magma. Intrusive igneous rocks, like granite, form when magma cools inside the Earth. Extrusive igneous rocks, like the basalt lava flow in this photo, form at the Earth's surface. Volcanic rocks are extrusive igneous rocks. 
Minerals, Magmas, and Volcanic Rocks
Lesson at a glance: Students will learn the common volcanic minerals and rocks in Hawaii and compare the composition of basalt from Kilauea to dacite from Mount St. Helens. The composition of magma controls the violence of eruptions and influences the shape of the volcanoes. 
Key Concepts: Rocks are classified by the minerals they contain or by their bulk chemistry. The islands of Hawaii are made of basalt, a rock that consist of the minerals olivine, pyroxene, and plagioclase, and is relatively rich in iron and magnesium and poor in silica. Most continental volcanoes are made of andesite and dacite, rocks that consist of the minerals pyroxene, plagioclase, and hornblende and are relatively poor in iron and magnesium but rich in silica. Fluid Hawaiian lavas are associated with non-violent eruptions and the construction of shield volcanoes. More viscous lavas from continental volcanoes are associated with violent eruptions and the construction of stratovolcanoes.

*
11.Volcano Monitoring Techniques 

Measuring the temperature of lava is one method used to monitor volcanic eruptions. 

Background:
Geologists have developed several methods to monitor changes in active volcanoes. These methods allow geologists to forecast and, in some cases, predict, the onset of an eruption. A forecast indicates that the volcano is "ready" to erupt. A prediction states that a volcano will erupt within a specified number of hours or days (Wright and Pierson, 1992). Several methods developed by and currently used at the Hawaiian Volcano Observatory are introduced in the following paragraphs. The Teaching Suggestions provide additional description and activities. 

Ground Movements.
Tilt is a measure of the slope angle of the flank of the volcano. insert: 
Prior to any change in the volcano, a balance is reached between the outward (mostly upward) pressure of the magma in the reservoir beneath the summit and the downward weight of the rocks above the magma reservoir. Tilt measurements will remain constant. 

As magma accumulates in the shallow reservoir beneath Kilauea volcano, it exerts pressure on the overlying and surrounding rocks. The pressure causes the summit of the volcano to move upward and outward to accommodate the greater volume of magma. As magma accumulates in the summit reservoir, it causes the slope (i.e., tilt) of the volcano's flanks to increase. Geologists can use precise measurements at specific locations over a period of time to detect movements caused by magma. The number and distribution of earthquakes also indicates changes in the summit area. 

If magma leaves the summit reservoir and moves into a rift zone, the summit will deflate and the tilt decreases. Rapid summit deflation is often a precursor to a flank eruption and, therefore, a useful monitoring tool. 

These graphs show how the number of earthquakes and the amount of tilt changed over the course of events outlined above. Modified from Unger (1974). 
In simplest terms, tiltmeters work like a carpenter's level by measuring changes in slope. 

During stable conditions, tilt at the summit changes very slowly or not at all. 

As magma fills the reservoir beneath the summit, the volcano inflates and the tilt of the flanks increases, sometimes very rapidly. 

As magma leaves the reservoir beneath the summit, the volcano deflates and the tilt of the flanks decreases. All slopes are exaggerated. Modified from Bullard (1984). 


The tiltmeters used by the Hawaiian Volcano Observatory are very sensitive because they must measure changes in slope as small as one part per million. A slope change of one part per million is equivalent to raising the end of a board one kilometer long only one millimeter. That's roughly equivalent to lifting a board six city-blocks long only the height of a dime at one end! Photograph of a tiltmeter courtesy of U.S. Geological Survey. 

Electronic distance measurement (EDM) uses a laser light source to measure the distance between two locations. For example, if a new batch of magma arrives at the summit of Kilauea, the volcano expands, and the distance between two points increases. EDM is also used across rift zones or in areas with active faults. In the photo EDM is being used to measure the Puu Oo cone. 

This photo shows the tilt record for the onset of a flank eruption in November of 1979. Tilt near the summit changed 5 microradians in about 12 hours. 

Standard leveling surveys are also used to determine changes in horizontal and vertical distances. Geologists use permanent markers, called benchmarks, as reference points. As magma intrudes beneath an area, the benchmarks move upward and outward. 
In many cases, tilt is used in conjunction with EDM and leveling surveys to constrain the location, and in some cases size, of an intrusion. 

A new tool, called Global Position System or GPS, is being used to measure the changes in a volcano prior to or during eruptions. GPS uses a system of orbiting satellites, receivers on the volcano, and computers. The position of the satellites are known to within a few meters. They send signals which include the time the signal left the satellite. The receivers note the time that the signal arrived. The time it takes for the signal to travel from satellite to receiver can then be determined. Knowing the travel time and the velocity of the signal (the speed of light) the distance between the satellite and receiver can be determined. GPS can measure vertical and horizontal changes between different GPS receivers down to about one third of an inch (1 cm). By visiting the same locations every few months volcanologists can determine where and how much the volcano is changing shape. This photo shows a GPS receiver on the south flank of Kilauea. Note the benchmark below the receiver. 

Seismicity.

The frequency, magnitude, location, and type of earthquakes associated with active volcanoes are used for monitoring and forecasting eruptions. For example, on a typical day, Kilauea has 200 low-magnitude earthquakes that are too small to be felt. In contrast, just prior to the onset of an eruption, hundreds of earthquakes are recorded and dozens are felt near the epicenter. This photo shows the earthquake record for the onset of a flank eruption in November of 1979. 

The distribution of earthquakes provides information about magma pathways and the structure of volcanoes. The red dots show earthquakes associated with magma movement. They define the east and southwest rifts of Kilauea. The blue dots show earthquakes associated the sliding of the south flank of Kilauea. 

In 1974, one year before the eruption of Mauna Loa volcano, the number of earthquakes increased deep beneath the volcano. Throughout the year, the number of earthquakes continued to increase and migrated towards the surface (Koyanagi and others, 1975). 

ORDINARY EARTHQUAKES.

OTHER SEISMICITY (EARTHQUAKES).
Magma movement and the onset of an eruption produce a distinctive seismic pattern called harmonic tremor. Seismologist must sort through the records of hundreds of earthquakes and determine which are related to the volcano and which were caused by man-induced or natural forces. 

Seismometers, the instruments that detect the earthquakes, are set up at numerous locations on the volcano. The information about the earthquakes is sent by radio waves to the Volcano Observatory. This seismometer is on the island of Pagan. 

Gas Geochemistry.

Gas samples are collected from fumaroles, like those near Sulfur Bank, and from active vents. The composition of the gas or a change in the rate of gas emission provides additional information on what is happening inside the volcano. For example, an increase in the ratio of carbon to sulfur can be used to indicate the arrival of a new batch of magma at the summit reservoir. Shortly before the onset of the Puu Oo eruption, the amount of hydrogen gas at the summit of Kilauea Volcano increased significantly (McGee and others, 1987). This photo shows gas geochemists collecting a sample. 

The amount of sulfur dioxide (SO2) released by the volcano can be measured indirectly by a correlation spectrometer or COSPEC. The spectrometer compares the light coming through the volcanic plume to a known spectra of sulfur dioxide. The flux of sulfur dioxide (SO2) nearly doubled after the 1983 eruption began (Greenland and others, 1985). The large amount of sulfur dioxide released by Kilauea each day causes numerous problems including adverse health effects( headaches, fatigue, respiratory difficulties), vog (volcanic smog), and acid rain. Photo shows volcanologist measuring sulfur dioxide plume at Puu Oo vent. 


Geology.

The geologic study of volcanoes provides information about the potential hazards during eruptions and the chemical and physical processes associated with eruptions. This photo shows geologists collecting a lava sample through a skylight.

Geologists from the U.S. Geological Survey's Hawaiian Volcano Observatory have been monitoring the current eruption of Kilauea since 1983. The geologists monitor changes at the active vents and ocean entries, collect lava and tephra samples, map the distribution of vents and lava flows, measure lava temperatures, conduct research, and provide information to the public and the press, and advise local civil defense authorities. In this photo, a volcanologist is preparing a time lapse camera to make observations of the Puu Oo lava pond. 
Scott Rowland's Working on Hawaiian Volcanoes provides more information on the methods used to monitor active volcanoes. 
Volcano Watch, a publication of the U.S. Geological Survey's Hawaiian Volcano Observatory, has numerous articles about monitoring volcanoes. 
The U.S. Geological Survey's Cascade Volcano Observatory also describes the methods used to monitor volcanoes. 


*
12. Kinds of Volcanic Eruptions.
Even people with only a little interest in science are aware that there are several kinds of volcanic eruptions. Most television viewers have seen the dramatic footage of the lateral blast of the 1980 Mount St. Helens eruption. The recent destruction of the Wahaula Visitor Center in Hawaii Volcanoes National Park, the Royal Gardens subdivision, and the village of Kalapana brought Hawaiian eruptions to the nation's attention. Footage from the 1991-1993 Etna eruption in Italy showed the successful diversion of lava away from a village. 
The 1991 explosive eruption of Mount Pinatubo in the Philippines forced the evacuation of American servicemen, their families, and thousands of Filipinos. 
Newspaper articles have described the discovery of a large submarine volcanic field on the Pacific Ocean floor. These examples illustrate the range in different types of volcanic eruptions reported by the media. Photograph of Hawaiian eruption at Puu Oo, a central vent, on the flank of Kilauea copyrighted by Paul Buklarewicz. 



Background:
Thomas Jaggar established a volcano observatory in Hawaii because the eruptions could be viewed relatively safely. Jaggar was familiar with the violent characteristics of other types of volcanoes, having visited Soufriere and Mont Pelee in Martinique after the 1902 eruptions. He hoped that knowledge gained from Hawaiian volcanoes would be used to monitor more dangerous volcanoes and reduce the hazard to people living near them. 
This lesson describes different types of volcanic eruptions. Several different classification schemes are presented because different aspects of an eruption are of interest. Eruptions can occur at different locations on a volcano and can show an amazing range of characteristics. The lesson starts with a description of the location of eruptions. This section is followed by a description of water-related eruptions. The lesson concludes with a classification of eruptions based on their character. The primary sources for the following classifications are MacDonald (1972), McClelland and others (1989), and Williams and McBirney (1979). 

Classifications Based on Form and Location of the Vent.

Eruptions can be classified by the opening through which volcanic material flows or is ejected. Lava or pyroclastic material can be erupted from a fissure or a central vent. A fissure is a "surface of fracture or a crack in rock along which 
there is distinct separation" (Bates and Jackson, 1980, p. 232). A fissure eruption is an "eruption that takes place from an elongate fissure" (Bates and Jackson, 1980, p. 232). Fissure eruptions are common along mid-ocean ridges and produce pillow basalts. Fissure eruptions are also common in Hawaii and often produce curtains of fire as lava fountains along a fissure. This slide shows a fissure eruption near Halemaumau on April, 30, 1982. 

In contrast, a central vent is the "opening at the Earth's surface of a volcanic conduit of cylindrical or pipelike form" (Bates and Jackson, 1980, p. 102). A central eruption is the "ejection of debris and lava flows from a central point, forming a more or less symmetrical volcano" (Bates and Jackson, 1980, p. 102). The 1991 eruption of Mount Pinatubo and the 1980 explosive eruption of Mount St. Helens, after the lateral blast, are examples of central eruptions. A central eruption continued at Mount St. Helens as a volcanic dome grew within the crater of the volcano. Central eruptions also occur in Hawaii, such as the explosive eruption of 1790 or the 1967-1968 lava lake in Halemaumau. The 1969-1974 Mauna Ulu eruption began as a fissure eruption and evolved to a central vent. The 1983 eruption of Kilauea Volcano began as a fissure eruption and, over the course of several months, became localized at a central vent . A similar pattern, although of shorter duration, occurred during the 1959 eruption at Kilauea Iki Crater. This photo shows an eruption from a central vent at Paricutin in Mexico. 

Eruptions can also be classified by the location where volcanic material reaches the surface. Central eruptions can also be called summit eruptions, if they are located at the volcano's summit. Summit eruptions are the most common type of volcanic eruption. The explosive eruptions of Mount St. Helens and Mount Pinatubo are examples of summit eruptions. The most recent summit eruption of Kilauea occurred in 1982. Volcanic material can also be erupted from the side of a volcano to produce a flank eruption. Flank eruptions are common in Hawaii where magma travels in rift zones to the flank of the volcano. Since 1955, most eruptions of Kilauea Volcano have been on the east flank (rift zone) of the volcano. The ongoing eruption of Kilauea Volcano is the longest and most voluminous flank eruption in historical time. 

Characteristics of Water-Related Eruptions.
McClelland and others (1989) reported on 388 documented volcanic eruptions from 1975 to 1985. They found four characteristic ways that water interacts with eruptions: submarine eruptions, formation of new islands, subglacial eruptions, and crater lakes. 

Few submarine eruptions have been documented because of the difficulty in monitoring submarine volcanoes. Several lines of evidence indicate that submarine eruptions occur. Seismicity characteristic of volcanic eruptions and intrusions has been recorded at some seamounts (submarine volcanoes). Fresh volcanic material and floating rafts of pumice also indicate submarine eruptions. Boiling sea water is also evidence of shallow eruptions. A submarine eruption was reported near Necker Island in 1955. Passengers aboard a plane bound for Honolulu from Tokyo saw what appeared to be a column of smoke rising from the water. On a closer approach, they found an area of steaming, turbulent water about one mile (1.5 km) in diameter. Nearby was an area of several thousand square yards that looked like dry land. MacDonald and others interpreted this "dry land" as a pumice raft that subsequently became water-logged and sank. This photograph shows water discolored by pyroclasts and a steam plume rising above a submarine eruption at Kavachi. In 1996, a submarine eruption occurred on the ocean ridge off the coast of Oregon. 

Shallow water eruptions are characterized by steam explosions that produce islands made of tephra. In most cases, the islands are eroded by ocean waves. In some cases lava is erupted subaerially and forms a protective cap on the island. Formation of a new Hawaiian island has not occurred in the recent geologic past. However, this process is one stage in the growth of all Hawaiian volcanoes. Loihi, a submarine volcano south of the island of Hawaii, is expected to reach this stage in a couple of hundred thousand years. Photograph of explosive interaction of lava and water by Donna Donovan-O'Meara of Volcano Watch International. 

Only five subglacial eruptions were reported in the ten-year interval studied by McClelland and others (1989). They note that most of these eruptions occur in remote regions. Surprisingly, there have been subglacial volcanic deposits in Hawaii. About 10,000 years ago, during the Ice Age, the summit of Mauna Kea Volcano was covered by a glacier. Subglacial eruptions produced pillow basalts (Porter, 1987). There is no evidence of subglacial eruptions on Mauna Loa Volcano. However, more recent eruptions may have buried the older subglacial volcanic deposits. Glaciers did not form on Kilauea Volcano because of its low elevation, however it was cold enough to snow. This photograph shows pillow lava that formed beneath the ice on Mauna Kea about 170,000 years ago. Photograph from S.C. Porter, Pleistocene subglacial eruptions on Mauna Kea, U.S. Geological Survey Professional Paper 1350. 

The summits of some volcanoes contain crater lakes. Close proximity of magma to the lake can lead to explosive activity. Crater lakes can also generate hazardous mudflows. McClelland and others (1989) reported 24 eruptions that occurred through crater lakes between 1975 and 1985. The presence of only one small lake on the Mauna Kea Volcano makes an eruption associated with a crater lake in Hawaii very unlikely. The recent eruption at Ruapehu in New Zealand displayed many of the common characteristics of this type of eruption. Phreatic explosion at Ruapehu in 1992. 

Classifications Based on the Character of the Eruption.

Eruptions can be classified by how explosive they are. An explosive eruption is an "eruption ... that is characterized by the energetic ejection of pyroclastic material" (Bates and Jackson, 1980, p. 217). This photograph shows the explosive eruption of Augustine volcano in Alaska on March 27, 1986. 

An effusive eruption is characterized by the relatively quiet outpouring of lava (MacDonald, 1972, p. 210). A mixed eruption is an eruption "that includes both the emission of lava and the explosive ejection of pyroclasts" (Bates and Jackson, 1980, p. 403). This photo shoes the gentle outpouring of lava from a vent in Halemaumau Crater. 
Since early in this century, eruptions have been classified by their resemblance to specific volcanoes, where certain types of activity are common. Thus, Hawaiian, Strombolian, Vulcanian, and Peleean eruptions are named for the volcanoes of Hawaii, Stromboli (Italy), Vulcano (Italy), and Mt. Pelee (Martinique, West Indies). Additional classifications are based on the nature and scale of activity, for example, basaltic flood and gas eruptions. Plinian eruptions are named for Pliny the Elder, a Roman naturalist who died in an eruption of Vesuvius in the year A.D. 79. MacDonald (1972) noted that there are gradations between each type of eruption and that some volcanoes can display more than one type of activity. 
In the paragraphs that follow, each type of eruption is described. A review of the terms used to describe tephra may be useful. Click here for a summary of the characteristics of each type of eruption. 
Hawaiian eruptions are characterized by quiet, effusive eruptions that result from the low viscosity, low gas content, and high eruption temperatures of Hawaiian magmas. 

During some eruptions, hydrostatic pressure (pressure from magma at higher levels in the system) and the expansion of gas shoot lava high into the air. These lava fountains are commonly a few tens to hundreds of feet (meters) high. Less common are fountains that reach over 1,000 feet (300 m) in height. The highest 1959 lava fountain at Kilauea Iki reached 1,900 feet (580 m) in height. Macdonald (1972) states that lava fountains are not truly explosive and are best thought of as jets of incandescent lava shot into the air like water from a fire hose. The lava accumulates near the vent to produce a spatter or cinder cone. The 1959 Kilauea Iki eruption made Puu Puai, a 125-foot (38 m) high cinder and spatter cone. Hawaiian eruptions commonly start as fissure eruptions with a curtain of fire or closely spaced lava fountains. During this stage of an eruption, spatter ramparts can form. If the lava level in the fissure is high enough, lava can overflow. Because of their basaltic composition, the lava flows are thin, fluid, and extensive. The flows can be pahoehoe or aa. 
If the eruption is from a central vent, repeated overflowings can form a gently sloped mound of lava, much like a small "shield volcano" (Macdonald, 1972, p. 215). Mauna Ulu, on the upper east rift zone of Kilauea Volcano, is an example of this type of feature. This photo shows a high lava fountain during phase 12 of the Mauna Ulu eruption. The ongoing eruption of Kilauea Volcano is typical of Hawaiian eruptions, with the exception of its long duration and great volume. 

Basaltic flood eruptions are similar to Hawaiian eruptions in general character but differ by the very large volume of lava produced. In the northwestern United States, basaltic flood eruptions produced flows with an average thickness of 80 ft (25 m) that can be over 60 miles (100 km) long. Individual flows can cover more than 15,600 square miles (40,000 square km)(Swanson and others, 1975). The thick accumulation of laterally extensive basaltic lava flows that result from basaltic flood eruptions are called plateau or flood basalts (Williams and McBirney, 1979). This photo shows a stack of lava flows in the Columbia River Flood Basalt along the Snake River south of Asotin, Washington. 

Photograph of Strombolian eruption at Stromboli copyrighted by Steve O'Meara of Volcano Watch International. 
Strombolian eruptions are named for Stromboli volcano off the west coast of Italy, where a typical eruption consist of the rhythmic ejection of incandescent cinder, lapilli, and bombs to heights of a few tens or hundreds of feet (meters). The effusion of lava flows may or may not accompany the ejection of pyroclastic material. Lava flows from Strombolian eruptions are typically more viscous than Hawaiian lava flows and thus are somewhat shorter and thicker (Macdonald, 1972). Tephra is glowing red when it leaves the vent but becomes black and nearly solid before hitting the ground. Cinder is most common with less abundant bombs and lapilli. Ash may be present in relatively minor amounts. The tephra accumulates near the central vent and builds a cinder cone. Magma associated with Strombolian activity is basaltic or andesitic and has a higher viscosity than Hawaiian magmas. Because of the higher viscosity, gas has greater difficulty escaping. Gas bubbles burst at the top of the magma column, producing small explosions and throwing clots of molten lava into the air. Strombolian eruptions can last from a few hours or days to a few months or a few years. The long duration of Strombolian activity is a common characteristic. Paricutin volcano in Mexico erupted continuously from 1943 to 1952, producing a cone made of cinder, bombs, lapilli, and ash. Izalco, in El Salvador, was constructed by Strombolian eruptions. 

Vulcanian eruptions are named after the cone of Vulcano in the Lipari Islands west of Italy. Vulcanian eruptions can involve almost any type of magma but felsic magma, magma with relatively high silica content, is most common (Williams and McBirney, 1979). This type of eruption usually begins with steam explosions that remove old, solid lithic (rock) material from the central vent. The main phase of the eruption is characterized by the eruption of viscous, gas-rich magma that forms vitric (glassy) ash. An eruption cloud, a cauliflower- or mushroom-shaped cloud of ash, develops above the vent. The eruption cloud can be gray or black. Lightning in the eruption cloud is common during Vulcanian eruptions. Airfall, pyroclastic flow, and base-surge deposits can form a cone of ash, surrounded by wide sheets of ash. Tephra deposits from Vulcanian eruptions are more widely dispersed than deposits from Hawaiian or Strombolian eruptions. The eruption of thick, viscous lava flows indicates the end of the eruptive cycle (Williams and McBirney, 1979). 

Peleean eruptions are named for Mont Pelee in the West Indies, where this type of activity was first witnessed and described in 1902-1903. Peleean eruptions are associated with rhyolitic or andesitic magmas. The two characteristic features of Peleean eruptions are the formation of domes and glowing avalanches (Macdonald, 1972). During the opening stages of the eruption, violent glowing avalanches of hot ash travel down the flanks of the volcano. These incandescent avalanches can start fires and are powerful enough to topple walls. Tephra deposits are generally much less widespread than most Vulcanian and Plinian eruptions (Williams and McBirney, 1979). 

Following the initial explosive stage, viscous magma forms a steep-sided dome or volcanic spine in the volcanic vent. Gravity or internal pressure can cause the dome to collapse, resulting in hot block-and ash flows. Peleean eruptions generally complete their eruptive cycle in only a few years (Williams and McBirney, 1979). Santiaguito, in Guatemala, is an example of a Peleean eruption that has continued for decades. Photo shows a volcanic spine at the summit of the Mt. Pelee. 

Plinian eruptions are named for the famous Roman naturalist Pliny the Elder. He died during an eruption of Vesuvius in A.D. 79. Pliny the Elder's nephew described the eruption, which is characteristic of Plinian eruptions. Two key characteristics are an exceptionally powerful, continuous gas blast eruption and the ejection of large volumes of pumice (Walker and Crosdale, 1971). Plinian eruptions can last less than a day, such as the short-lived explosions of gas-rich, siliceous magma prior to the eruption of fluid basaltic lava flows in Iceland. Longer-lived, more voluminous Plinian eruptions can last for weeks or months. The longer eruptions start with showers of ash followed by glowing avalanches. In some cases, so much magma is erupted that the summit of the volcano collapses to produce a caldera. Classic examples of collapse to produce a caldera are Krakatau in 1883, Crater Lake about 7,000 years ago, and S santorini in 1500 B.C. During Plinian eruptions fine ash can be dispersed over very large areas. Total volume of tephra erupted during the formation of Crater Lake was 18 cubic miles (75 cubic km). The 1886 eruption of Tarawera is a rare case of a basaltic Plinian eruption. Photograph shows the Plinian eruption of Mount St. Helens on May 18, 1980. 

Rhyolitic flood eruptions are characterized by the production of large volumes of rhyolitic material that spread great distances from their vents to produce broad, nearly level plains (Macdonald,1972). Rhyolitic flood eruptions are from fissure vents. The fluidity of these eruptions is a result of hot ash flows. Macdonald cites the 1912 eruption of Mt. Katmai in Alaska as an example of a rhyolitic flood eruption. This eruption produced a caldera and greater than 1.8 cubic miles (7 cubic km) of ash. The area is now part of Katmai National Park. 

Ultravulcanian eruptions are characterized by the eruption of solid rock and steam. The fragments can be from ash to blocks in size and cold to incandescent in temperature. No new magma is involved. These eruptions are also called phreatic, based on the assumption that the steam originates from the contact of ground water with hot rock. Jaggar (1949) called this type of activity "steam-blast" eruptions. The 1924 explosive eruption at Halemaumau is an excellent example of an ultravulcanian eruption. The 1963-1965 eruption of Surtsey in Iceland and the 1965 eruption of Taal in the Philippines are additional examples of ultravulcanian eruptions. 


*
13.Magma pathways, calderas, and pit craters.
View to the northwest across Kilauea Caldera. Halemaumau pit crater is in the center of the photo. 
Calderas dominate the summits of Kilauea and Mauna Loa volcanoes. The rift zones of these volcanoes are marked by the presence of pit craters. This lesson describes how these features form and the path that magma follows from its source to the surface. 
Background: 
The background begins with a description of how magma gets from its point of origin to the surface. As magma accumulates in a shallow reservoir near the summit, it exerts more and more force on the surrounding rocks. If the weight of the rocks pushing down is greater than the force of the magma pushing up, the summit can collapse to produce a caldera. The background concludes with a description of how craters form.

Cross Sections.
Schematic cross-section of a Hawaiian volcano. Vertical exaggeration = 2x. Magma, liquid rock, forms by melting some of the minerals in the mantle at depths of 40-100 miles (60-170 km). The melting is in the Hawaiian hot spot. Magma ascends due to its low density relative to the surrounding rocks, and follows sets of more or less continuous conduits towards the surface. Pressure from the magma causes overlying rocks to fracture, forming the conduits. Enough conduits are beneath the volcano to provide a steady supply of magma to a shallow reservoir 2-5 miles (3-7 km) beneath the summit caldera. As more magma fills the reservoir, pressure builds. Schematic cross-section modified from Eaton and Murata (1960). 
Hypothetical cross-section beneath the summit of Kilauea Caldera. The numerous eruptions at Halemaumau Crater suggests a magma conduit between the reservoir and the crater. 
When the pressure exceeds the strength of the surrounding rocks, the rocks fracture. Magma moves into the fractures, making dikes or sills (Eaton and Murata, 1960; Decker, 1987). Dikes are tabular-shaped bodies of magma that cut across rock layers. Sills are tabular-shaped bodies of magma that intrude parallel to rock layers. After the magma solidifies, the tabular-shaped rock bodies are still called dikes and sills. Summit eruptions result from the upward growth of dikes from the shallow reservoir. Dikes can grow laterally and feed magma into the rift zones of the volcano. 
Cross-section of magma conduits to the summit reservoir and east rift zone of Kilauea Volcano. Conduits were identified by the distribution of earthquakes. Modified from Ryan and others (1981). 
The current eruption of Kilauea is fed through a dike that extends almost 12 miles (20 km) from the summit reservoir into the flank of the volcano. 

Definitions.

A review of a few definitions might be appropriate before starting the description of calderas and pit craters. These features are also described in Volcanic Landforms of Hawaii Volcanoes National Park. A vent is the "opening at the earth's surface through which volcanic materials are extruded" (Takahashi and Griggs, 1987). A caldera is "a large, basin-shaped volcanic depression, more or less circular ... the diameter of which is many times greater than that of the included vent or vents" (Bates and Jackson, 1980). A pit crater, like Halemaumau in the above photo, is "a crater formed by the sinking in of the surface; not primarily a vent for lava" (Macdonald and Abbott, 1977, p. 419). 

Calderas.

Calderas are common features during the shield-building stage of Hawaiian volcanoes. This general pattern of island evolution is being followed by Loihi, the submarine volcano southeast of Kilauea, which already has a summit caldera (Malahoff, 1987). This photo shows Mokuaweoweo, the caldera of Mauna Loa. 
The formation of a caldera probably requires the presence of a magma reservoir within a few miles (kilometers) of the summit of the shield volcano (Macdonald, 1965). During most of the life of the reservoir, magma exerts pressure outward radially away from the reservoir. 

The volume of magma and the amount of pressure the magma exerts is reflected by inflation and deflation of the summit of the volcano. 


During rare events, large volumes of magma leave the reservoir to supply summit eruptions or intrusions and eruptions on the flank of the volcano. If the volume of magma in the summit reservoir is greatly reduced, the amount of outward pressure can no longer support the weight of the overlying rocks. The overlying rocks act like a giant piston and push down on the magma reservoir. 

The rocks move downward on a set of curvilinear faults until their weight is balanced by the upward push of the magma that remained in the reservoir. The amount of downward movement by the rocks is equal to the amount of sag or collapse at the summit of the volcano. The rocks continue to settle until their weight is balanced by the pressure of magma in the reservoir The collapse or sag at the summit produces the caldera. Macdonald (1965) concluded that calderas grow by piecemeal collapse above the shallow magma reservoir. 
The calderas of the older volcanoes of the island have been filled by younger lava flows and cinder cones. The summits of Mauna Kea, Hualalai, and Kohala once had calderas, but they were filled by lava during the late stages of their history. Erosion of Kohala has exposed part of its ancient caldera. 
Geologists have noted a difference in the chemistry of lava erupted during the formation of calderas and during late-stage volcanic activity that fills the calderas. Calderas are associated with tholeiitic lavas, the same type of basaltic lava that makes up the bulk of Hawaiian shield volcanoes. Lava that fills calderas are transitional or alkalic (rich in sodium and potassium) in composition. The shift in composition supports the idea that calderas form near the conclusion of the tholeiitic shield-building stage(Stearns, 1940; Macdonald, 1962; Peterson and Moore, 1987). 

Pit Craters.

Pit craters are collapsed structures that form by the removal of underlying material (Wentworth and Macdonald, 1953). They have vertical walls and are cylindrical or ellipsoidal in shape. The lack of lava or pyroclastic material on the rim of the craters indicates that they are not formed by eruptions. However, subsequent eruptions can break out along the wall of the crater and produce lava that ponds on the crater floor. This photo shows Cone Crater (the cone with a deep crater) and Pit Craters on the southwest rift zone of Kilauea. The twin pit craters are about 100 feet (30 m) in diameter and 150 feet (50 m) deep. 

Pit craters are common on the summit and east rift zone of Kilauea Volcano. They range in size from less than 100 feet (30 m) to more than half a mile (0.8 km) across (Wentworth and Macdonald, 1953). Note that pit craters are smaller than calderas. Halemaumau Crater is a pit crater nestled in Kilauea Caldera. Kilauea Iki and Keanakakoi Craters are on the summit of Kilauea Volcano and adjacent to the main caldera. Several pit craters dot the upper east rift zone of Kilauea and include Lua Manu, Kokoolau, and Hiiaka Craters. Two large pit craters, Makaopuhi and Napau, are located on the middle east rift zone. Photograph of Keanakakoi Crater by Steve Mattox, March 11, 1996. 

Pit craters are less common on Mauna Loa. Two craters, North Pit and South Pit, adjoin Mokuaweoweo, the summit caldera of Mauna Loa. Lua Hou is a pit crater on the upper southwest rift zone of Mauna Loa. Lua Poholo (bottom of photo) is a pit crater adjacent to North Pit on the northeast side on Mokuaweoweo (top right of photo). 

*
14. Living with Hawaiian volcanoes.
This lesson presents many of the basic facts you need to know if you live on or plan to visit the volcanoes in Hawaii. This photo shows lava entering the ocean on the south flank of Kilauea. Lava has been extending the coastline on this part of the island for over 10 years.

Background: 
Hawaii's remote location, over 2,400 miles (3,840 km) from the nearest land mass (California) is shown above. Use the map to review the continents and the oceans of the world. 
Five main (also called windward) islands make most of the state of Hawaii. From southeast to northwest, the islands are Hawaii, Maui, Molokai, Oahu, and Kauai. The islands become progressively older to the northwest. Hawaii is the youngest and largest of the islands. 
Hawaii's Two Highest Volcanoes.
The Island of Hawaii's two highest mountains (volcanoes) are Mauna Kea and Mauna Loa. They are over 13,600 feet (4,150 m) above sea level and rise nearly 30,000 feet (9,100 m) from the sea floor. Haleakala, the highest mountain on Maui, is over 10,000 feet (3,050 m) high. The highest peaks on Molokai and Oahu are near 5,000 and 4,000 feet (1,525 and 1,220 m) in elevation, respectively. Kauai has a peak 5,200 feet (1,585 m) high.
Evolutionary Stages.
The evolutionary stage of the islands is reflected by the number of streams in a given area. Kilauea Volcano on the Island of Hawaii is so young that no streams have developed because of the porous and permeable nature of young lava flows. In contrast, Kauai is highly eroded by streams, producing the steep and beautiful slopes of the Napali Coast. This photo shows a canyon cut by a stream on the flank of Kohala, Island of Hawaii. 
Another major factor in the shape and size of the Hawaiian Islands is rainfall. Rainfall over the open sea near Hawaii ranges between 25 to 30 inches (60 to 75 cm) per year. Rainfall on the islands ranges from more than 400 inches (1,000 cm) per year to less than 10 inches (25 cm). The extreme range in the amount of rainfall is the result of wind patterns and mountains on each island. The tradewinds blow across the islands from the northeast. They bring moist air that produces rain on the windward side of each island. As an air mass passes to the leeward side of an island, it loses most of its moisture, resulting in little or no precipitation. Thick soils, numerous streams, and lush vegetation develop on the windward side of the islands. 
The Big Island.
The largest land area in the state is the Island of Hawaii, also called the "Big Island." Most of the population and major roads are in the coastal areas. The combination of large size, variable rainfall, and range in elevation produce numerous diverse environments.
Structure.
Structurally, a Hawaiian volcano can be divided into a summit area, rift zones, and flanks (area below the summit). The summit of a youthful volcano is defined by a caldera, a large, basin-shaped depression that can include smaller depressions called craters. A rift zone is a linear zone of structural weakness in the flank of the volcano. For most eruptions, magma, molten rock, migrates to, and is stored in, a shallow reservoir beneath the summit . If conditions allow, magma can migrate from the reservoir to the summit to produce an eruption. In some cases, magma migrates from the reservoir into the rift zone to produce a blade-shaped body of magma called a dike. Magma can flow from the dike to the surface to produce an eruption on the flank of the volcano. 
Volcanic centers and rift zones of the main islands of Hawaii. Compiled from Langenheim and Clague (1987). 
Volcanic centers and rift zones of the Island of Hawaii. NWRZ=Northwest Rift Zone, ERZ=East Rift Zone, SERZ=Southeast Rift Zone, NERZ=Northeast Rift Zone, and SWRZ=Southwest Rift Zone. Compiled from Langenheim and Clague (1987). 
Volcano Classification.
Volcanoes are classified as extinct, dormant, or active. An extinct volcano is a volcano that is not now erupting and is not likely to erupt in the future. Kohala, shown above, has not erupted for 60,000 years and will probably not erupt again. 
A dormant volcano is a volcano that is not now erupting but has erupted in historic time, since written records were kept (the last 200 years in Hawaii), and is likely to do so in the future. Mauna Kea, shown above, has not erupted in historic time but is expected to erupt again in the future. There is no precise distinction between an active and dormant volcano. Because some volcanoes remain inactive for thousands of years between eruptions, it can be difficult to distinguish between an active and a dormant volcano. Volcanologists at the Smithsonian Institution estimate that 1,500 volcanoes worldwide have the potential of erupting. 
An active volcano is a volcano that is erupting or is expected to do so in the near future. Kilauea volcano has erupted from its summit and flank 63 times since 1790. This photo shows a flank eruption at Mauna Ulu. Kilauea has been erupting continuously since January 3, 1983. 
Five volcanoes make up the Island of Hawaii: Kohala, Hualalai, Mauna Kea, Mauna Loa, and Kilauea. The oldest volcano on the island is Kohala, which last erupted 60,000 years ago. It is difficult to know if Kohala is extinct or dormant because many Hawaiian volcanoes evolve through a rejuvenated stage. At present, Kohala is thought to be extinct, and the potential for a future eruption is low. Mauna Kea has erupted several times in the last 10,000 years. The most recent eruption was 3,500 years ago, long before the Polynesians arrived. Although Mauna Kea has not erupted in historical time, it is considered dormant volcano because it likely to erupt in the future. Hualalai is considered active because it last erupted in 1801. During an eruption about 2,650 years ago, lava flows covered most of the surface of the volcano. Hualalai has erupted about 200 times in the last 10,000 years. An eruption is highly probable in the next 200 years and could occur during the next few decades. Mauna Loa is an active volcano. The most recent eruption occurred in 1984. Most Mauna Loa eruptions begin at the summit. About half of these migrate to a rift zone. The 1984 eruption followed this pattern, with vents migrating into the northeast rift zone within a few hours after the eruption started. The eruption lasted 3 weeks, and lava flows advanced to within 4 miles (6 km) of Hilo. Mauna Loa eruptions commonly produce a large volume of lava, which can travel great distances in a short period of time. Kilauea is one of the world's most active volcanoes. The current eruption on the east rift zone began in January 1983. It is the largest-volume and most long-lived eruption of the east rift zone in historical time. The most recent eruptions on the southwest rift zone and summit occurred in 1974 and 1982, respectively. 
Haleakala, on Maui, erupted in 1790 and is considered an active volcano. Haleakala is the only Hawaiian volcano not on the Island of Hawaii that has erupted in historical time. Crandell (1983) reported that Haleakala has erupted at least 10 times in the last 1,000 years. Aerial view of the south flank of Haleakala by Steve Mattox, March 18, 1996. 
Volcanoes on the other islands also have the potential to erupt. However, none of these volcanoes have erupted in the last 10,000 years and are considered extinct. Youthful-looking features, such as Diamond Head and Punchbowl Craters on Oahu, serve as reminders for the potential of future eruptions. This photo shows part of the Koolau Range, the erosional remnant of one of the two shield volcanoes that make the island of Oahu. Kaneohe Bay is in the foreground. 


<#POCK>
*
The unstable earth.

Earth's hot heart.
The earth is not as solid as it seems. Just a few dozen miles below our feet, its interior is hot enough to make rock flow like molasses.
The area between Earth's crust and core, called the mantle, churns slowly with a power that can make the ground tremble, force volcanoes to erupt, and cause continents to collide.

Thin-skinned.
The Earth's crust, when compared to its diameter of 7,927 miles (12,750 km), is proportionately as thin as an apple's skin. At its thickest, the crust is just 43 miles (70 km) deep.

Mantle rock.
From under the crust, the Earth's mantle extends 1,800 miles (2,900 km) deep into the planet's interior. It is thought to be partly made of pedidotite, a rock somtimes thrown up to the surface during volcanic eruptions. The mantle is so hot that rock flows constantly, and in places, actually melts altogether.

Metal core.
The Earth has a dense core of iron, mixed with a bit of nickel. That this core has extreme density is proved by its deflection of earthquake waves- and this metal makeup would match that of meteorites found on Earth.

Inside the Earth.
The complex structure of the Earth's interior was discovered by analyzing vibrations from earthquakes and volcanoes, which revealed a crust, a mantle and a core. The crust and upper mantle are split into three layers: the rigid lithosphere, the weak asthenosphere, and the mesosphere.

Plate tectonics.
The Earth's rigid shell, or lithosphere, is broken into huge fragments called tectonic plates. These plates are not fixed - they are continually moving on top of the mantle. In some places, plates are colliding (convergence zones); in others, they are pulling apart (divergence zones); and in yet others, they are sliding past each other (transforms).

The broken shell.
Earth's shell is made up of nine large tectonic plates and several smaller ones. Some plates are growing, while others are being worn away and will eventually disappear.

Continental Drift.
1. About 220 million years ago, all the continents were joined in the supercontinent of Pangea, a Greek word meaning "all lands". Pangea was surrounded by the giant ocean of Panthalassa, or "all seas".
2. By about 200 million years ago, Pangea had split into two huge landmasses called Gondwanaland and Laurasia. About 135 million years ago, these landmasses began to divide, opening up the world's ocean and seas.
3. Over the next 120 million years, theses divided landmasses drifted closer or father apart to become the current continents. The Americas drifted west, emerging as separate continents; India drifted north, and melded with Asia; and Australia and Antartica separated and drifted south.

Plate movement.
Tectonic plates move very slowly, drifting at about the same rate as a fingernail grows. Using laser and satellite technology, scientists can accurately measure the distance between the continents and so monitor the precise rate of plate movement.

Fossil evidence.
Fossil remains of the long-extinct reptile Lystrosaurus - found in India, Africa, and Antarctica - provide strong evidence that these separate continents were once joined. Other fossils, such as those of the Glossopteris fern, offer similar proof.

Plate facts.
The west coast of Africa perfectly mirrors the East coast of South America, showing they were once joined.
Fossils of tropical plants are found on the Arctic island of Spitsbergen because it was once in the tropics.

Converging Plates.
In many places around the world, tectonic plates are slowly crunching together with enormous force. As they collide, one plate can be pushed under the other, a process called subduction. The lower plate slowly collapses as it slides down into the heat of Earth's mantle. Where the plates meet, deep trenches open up in the ocean floor.

Convergence Zones.
The illustration shows where the Philippines plate and the Pacific plate push up against the Asian plate off the coast of Japan. The Philippines plate is subducted beneath the Asian plate, while the Pacific plate is subducted beneath both.
Ocean bed sediments scraped off to form a bank, called an accretionary wedge.
Subducted plate melts as it descends into mantle.
Hot blobs of magma burn their way through the overlying plate and erupt as volcanoes.

The Trieste's deep dive.
The Mariana Trench, the world's deepest, plunges to 35,640 ft (10,863m). The bathyscape Trieste was the first vessel to reach its floor, on January 23, 1960.

Collision.
When two plates collide, the crunch gradually mangles the colliding plate edges. The edge of the plate on top is often so crumpled by the collision that enormous mountains are created. All the world's great mountain ranges -the Andes, Rockies, Himalayas, Caucasus, Alps - formed this way. Meanwhile, the subducted plate is destroyed as it slides into the Earth's interior. As it melts, hot lumps burn up through the overlying plate to create volcanoes.
Andes form as top plate crumples. 

Transform fault.
In places called transforms, two plates slip sideways past each other in opposite directions. Neither is added to or destroyed, but transforms can cause earthquakes as the plates grind past each other.
Plates slide past each other.

Diverging Plates.
In many places along the ocean's floor, tectonic plates are steadily diverging, or moving farther apart. As they do, molten rock from the Earth's interior rises up into the gap. When it meets the cold ocean water, the molten rock freezes to the edges of the plates, creating a series of jagged ridges along the ocean floor, called a mid-ocean ridge.

The widening oceans.
As plates diverge, the mid-ocean ridge gets wider as new rock is  constantly added, and so the ocean floor spreads gradually wider. The widening floor of the Atlantic Ocean, for example, is driving the Americas farther away from Europe and Africa. The Mid-Atlantic Ridge can be observed in Iceland, where it rises above the ocean surface.

Mapping the ocean.
Oceanographers use echo-sounding, which bounces signals off the ocean floor to map its contours.

Sea-Floor Spreading
1) As plates move apart, hot magma wells up from the mantle, emerging as lava. As the lava meets the cold sea water, it solidifies, freezing onto the edges of the plates.
2) As the old plate edges move farther apart, the solidifying lava fills in the gap, forming new sea floor (oceanic crust). This is then pushed apart by magma rising from below.
3) When the tip of new rock gets too big, it snaps off under its own weight, subsiding into the mantle. The result is a series of scarp faces across the ridge wherever the tip cracks off.

Magnetic evidence.
As molten rock solidifies, its particles align with the Earth's shifting magnetic field, leaving a permanent record of the field's polarity at the time. Matching magnetic alignments in stripes of rock on both sides of a mid-ocean ridge provide evidence of sea-floor spreading, indicating that the stripes must have been formed at the same time.

Faults.
The slow, unstoppable movement of tectonic plates puts rocks under such enormous stress that they can twist and suddenly crack altogether. Where cracks, or "faults", appear, huge blocks of rock slip past each other, creating new cliffs, mountains, and valleys.

Transcurrent fault.
Where tectonic plates move sideways past one another at transform faults, wrench faults, also called strike-slip faults, often occur (see p.21). The biggest wrench faults are called transcurrent faults. The famous San Andreas Fault in California was created by the Pacific plate grinding past the north American plate.

Fault facts.
The Great Eastern African Rift Valley is over 1864 miles (3000 km) long.
In a quake in 1906, land around the San Andreas Fault rapidly shifted over 20ft (6m.).
 
Fault Types.
Normal fault.
At a normal fault, blocks of rock move up or down, sometimes creating a huge cliff called a fault scarp.
Rift valley.
A long, narrow block may sink between two parallel normal faults, forming a trough-shaped dip called a rift valley.
Wrench fault.
In a wrench, or a strike-slip, fault, the rocks shear sideways and the blocks move horizontally past each other.
Horst.
A horst is a block of rock thrown up between normal faults, often creating vast plateaus or mountain ranges.
Reverse fault.
In a reverse fault, one block is forced up over another, creating a fragile overhang called a hanging wall.
Complex faults.
In complex fracture zones, a series of normal and reverse faults may tilt the blocks of rock in many directions.

Where disaster may strike.
A volcano can have a lifespan of a million years or more, and centuries can pass between eruptions. So, it is not always easy to identify  which volcanoes are dangerous, or "active" - likely to erupt at any time - and which are "dormant", or sleeping, or "extinct", and never likely to erupt again. This is why the official list of active volcanoes compiled by the Smithsonian institution in Washington DC lists those that have erupted in the last 10,000 years-a total of more than 1,500 worldwide.

The ring of fire.
Many of the world's most violent and active volcanoes occur in a ring around the Pacific Ocean, known as the "Ring of Fire". They include Pinatubo in the Philippines and Fujiyama in Japan.

Stratovolcanoes.
The most explosive volcanoes occur in the places where tectonic plates collide, usually subduction zones. The forced blending of plate material creates the sticky rhyolitic and dacitic (see pp.36-37) magma that encourages sudden, violent eruptions and leaves steep, cone-shaped stratovolcanoes.

Shield volcanoes.
The crust under the ocean is thin, so lava here is basaltic, uncontaminated by other rocks, and very runny. So volcanoes over ocean hot spots are shield volcanoes, which gush steadily.

Rift volcanoes.
Where hot spots occur in the middle of continents, the magma is contaminated by materials from the continental crustal. Such volcanoes may not be as active or explosive as those near subduction zones. With successive eruptions, however, they can still build up into huge, cone-shaped peaks such as Mount Kilimanjaro in Tanzania.

Mid-Ocean ridges.
There are thousands of volcanoes that erupt along mid-ocean ridges where tectonic plates pull apart. But most of them are quietly erupting fissure-volcanoes or hydrothermal vents, their activity occuring far beneath the ocean.

Deep quake.
The Pacific region produces ninety percent of the earth's deep quakes and 75 percent of its mid-level quakes. Most of the rest occur in the Alpine-Himalayan belt. Transform faults create smaller quakes, which emit mostly damaging surface waves.

Volcanic eruptions.
Fire from below
Despite the heat of the Earth's interior, great pressure keeps most rock in the mantle solid. So, how is the liquid magma that supplies volcanoes created? Mantle rock melts into floods of magma, and collects along plate margins. Then, buoyed by its light weight, it wells to the surface to erupt from volcanoes.

Melt Networks.
Although it is solid, mantle rock can creep upwards. As it nears the surface, and the pressure drops, the rock can expand and start to melt. Melting begins on the edge of crystal grains in the rock quickly forming a linked network of microscopic tunnels. Liquid magma can ooze through these tunnels towards the surface like oil squeezed from a sponge.

Currents in the mantle.
The mantle is always churning slowly, as hot material rises to the surface, then cools and sinks, creating circular convection currents. If a slab of subducted plate sinks through the mantle to the core, a hot blob or "superplum" rises, forcing magma to the surface.

Volcanic Eruptions.
Mantle rock brought to the surface by circulating currents may make magma available for eruptions.

Mixed Magma.
In mantle rock, the materials that melt usually form basaltic magma, which is light and floats up towards the surface. Where the melt forms from a subducted plate, basalt-magma blobs rise up against the underside of the continental crust. Because the magma is so hot, it melts through. The silica, sodium, and potassium in crystal rocks are partially melted by the magma. These minerals then mix in to the basaltic magma, making it more acidic and viscous, and given to explosive eruptions.

Magma Layers.
Laboratory experiments have shown that this "mixed" magma may crystallize in layers of different minerals, for example, olivine, and pyroxene.

Magma Facts.
A superplume may have caused the slews of basalt during the Cretaceous period, 100 million years ago.
Basalt magma can reach temperatures of up to 2,200°F (1,200°C)

Volcanic Eruptions.
Volcanoes erupt because the hot magma  (liquid rock) in the Earth's mantle is less dense than the overlying solid rock. Wherever there is a crack in the rock, magma rises up and oozes through onto the surface. Where there is no crack, pressure may build up until the magma bursts out.

Repeat eruptions.
Volcanoes usually erupt again and again. The repose time - the time between eruptions - can vary from a few minutes to thousands of years, and occasionally displays a distinct rythm. Hawaii's Kilauea volcano erupts once a month, but most volcanoes are less regular.

Nearer the surface, various gases form ever larger bubbles.
Bubbles continue to expand as magam rises up and pressure falls.
Tiny bubbles form in magma as it rises through the chamber.

Gas power.
Magma can be driven from the ground by the carbin dyoxide an steam in it. As it nears the surface, bubbles of gas propel the molten rock from the vent.

Eruption facts.
At 12 ft (36m) below ground, pressure is ten times as high as it is on the surface.
Gas expands ten times in volume at it rises from 120 ft (36m) down to the surface.

Building mountains.
Volcanic cones are rarely made in a single eruption. More often they build up layer by layer in successive explosions, as did Paricutin in Mexico. 

Volcanic plug.
Often the most durable feature of a volcano is the vent through which the magma emerges. The magma that plugs the vents of some volcanoes is very tough, and can resist the weathering that wears away the softer cone of ash and lava. Eventually, all that may be left of the volcano is the plug standing above the landscape like a tower. A well-known volcanic plug is Le Puy in France.

Types of eruptions.
No volcano is quite the same. Each has its own particular shape and way of erupting - and each eruption is slightly different. Volcanoes cans be classified according to the way they erupt. A group is usually named after a classic eruption of its type. 

Submarine.
Steam makes eruptions much more pwerful - it can explode with 35-40 percent more energy than TNT. During a submarine eruption in shallow seas - less than 900 ft (300 m) deep - water in the volcano's vent can explode violently.
Steam billows from shallow-sea volcano.

Fissure.
In a fissure eruption, floods of hot, runny lava pour from a crack in the ground, which can be many miles long. As the lava reaches the surface, a fall in pressure allows the gases it holds to boil suddenly, shooting fountains of lava into the air.
Plateaus of lava spread far from fissure.

Hawaiian.
Like fissures, Hawaiian eruptions gush lava and fire. The lava, however, pours from a single vent, rather than a crack, creating a dome-shaped mountain. These domes are known as shield volcanoes because they are shaped like shields.
Runny lava from single vent.
Fire fountains shoot into the sky.

Strombolian.
In eruptions where magma is sticky, gases escape erratically, causing these volcanoes to spit clots of lava sporadically. These eruptions, which form a steep cone, are named after Stromboli, an active volcano on an island off southwest Italy. 
Sporadic eruptions blast ash and hot lava into air.
Steep cone formed by sticky lava, which does not flow far.

Vulcanian. 
A Vulcanian volcano is very explosive and unpredictable. In vulcanian eruptions, magma is so sticky that the vent clogs between eruptions - cannon-like blasts of ash clouds and magma fragments, followed by thick lava flows.
Explosive bursts eject ash clouds into the air.
Alternating layers of ash and lava build up a steep cone, known as a stratovolcano or composite cone.

Pelean.
Named after Mount Pelée in Martinique, Pelean eruptions feature glowing clouds of ash and gas, called nuée ardentes, that roar down the mountain at tremendous speeds. With stratovolcanoes, the ash forms a skirt around the foot of the cone.
Burning clouds of ash and gas consume everything in their way.

Plinian.
The most explosive of all are Plinian eruptions, named after Pliny the Younger, who witnessed the eruption of Vesuvius in AS 79. Boiling gases blast clouds of ash and volcanic fragments into the stratosphere.
Ash clouds as high as 11 miles (18 km) affect climate and cause dramatic sunsets.
Ash and lava shoot out like bullets until magma chamber is almost empty.

Explosive volcanoes.
Volcanoes can explode when viscous magma, rich in gas and steam, clogs the volcano's vent, so pressure builds up until the magma bursts through. The released pressure lets the steam boil, blasting magma, hot ash, gas, and steam into the air.

Andesite volcanoes.
The cooler magma is and the richer it is in silica, the stickier it is. The stickiest magmas are in subduction zones. Such magmas are called andesitic, after the Andes in South America, where Mount Cotopaxi is the highest volcano.

Formation of a caldera.
1)     In an active volcano, the magma chamber beneath the cone is full of molten magma that has risen from the mantle.
2)     If the level of magma in this chamber drops, the top of the cone may collapse into it, forming a giant crater called a caldera.
3) When the volcano begins to die down, the rest of the cone collapses ; the caldera may then fill with water, forming a crater lake.

Volcanic explosion.
The driving force in explosive eruptions is the boiling of carbon dioxide gas and steam trapped within the magma. The more gas and water is present, the more explosive a volcano is. Magma in or near subduction zones often contains ten times as much gas as elsewhere. Since magma here is also sticky, volcanoes are very violent.

Eruption facts.
Gas in magma can expand to hundreds of times the volume of the molten rock in seconds.
Silica-rich magma, linked with explosive eruptions, is called dacitic magma.

Lava.
Magma that has erupted onto the surface is called lava. The lava from explosive volcanoes is thick and pasty and spreads in slow-moving flows. These can be up to a few thousand feet deep but rarely reach farther than a mile from the vent.
Waxy or lumpy.
Runny lava cools and solidifies into smooth lobes that look like huge blobs of black candle wax. Pasty lava looks more like clumps of fused stone.

Creeping lava.
Runny lava flows in rivers of red-hot molten rock, but pasty lava creeps forward only about ten feet a day. The surface continually cools to a thick skin, which breaks sometimes as the red-hot lava oozes forward underneath. Big blocks ride on top of the flow and occasionally avalanche down its step front wall, sending up clouds of dust. Lava flows like this are so slow-moving that they are rarely dangerous - but they are almost impossible to stop.

Types of lava.
There are four main types of lava - basalt, andesite, dacite, and rhyolite. Basaltic lava has a silica content of about 50 percent and, when molten, is a runny as honey. Andesite is 55 percent silica and a sticky as molasses. Dacitic lava is 65 percent silica and has the consistency of hot tar. Rhyolite is 73 percent silica and is more like cold tar.

Glassy lava.
If lava cools very rapidly - in minutes rather than days or years - there is no time for crystals to grow. It hardens into a smooth rock such as shiny black obsidian, which, like window glass, is made up mainly of silicon dioxide.

Frothy lava.
Some lava is so frothy with bubbles that when it cools and solidifies, it is as full of tiny holes as a sponge. This frothy volcanic rock is called pumice, and it is so light that it actually floats in water. Pumice can be used for scouring skin.

Life from lava.
Volcanic ash is rich in minerals and makes fertile soil. Lava itself, however, makes a hostile environment and it may be in many years before the first lichens can be seen. Eventually, mosses, grasses, shrubs, and trees will take a hold.

Volcanic debris.
When an explosive volcano erupts, large lumps of volcanic material are hurled into the air. Volcanic blocks, or pyroclasts (meaning "fire-broken"), are shattered chunks of rock blown apart by the explosion. Volcanic bombs are blobs of molten magma that cool and harden in flight.

Volcanic blitz.
Volcanic blocks - pyroclasts and bombs - are called tephra. Major eruptions can shoot one-ton chunks of tephra one mile (1,500 m) upward at the speed of a jet. Most chunks land near the vent ; however, if they are ejected at the right angle, some may be hurled several miles away.

Bombs.
As volcanic bombs - red-hot and soft - fly through the air, they may twist into all kinds of shapes. "Breadcrust" bombs, for example, stretch into a loaflike shape, with the "crust" cracked by the expanding gases inside.

Blocks.
Most volcanic blocks are fragments of the volcanic plug, which is blasted from the vent in an eruption. Usually, blocks are much more angular in shape than bombs. They are typically 12-40 in (0.3-1 m) in diameter.

Cinders and lapilli.
Smaller pyroclasts are called cinders or lapilli, depending on their size. Cinders are rough lumps 2.5-12 in (6.4-30 cm) in diameter. Lapilli (which means "little stone") are smaller, nut-size lumps that measure 0.1-2.5 in (0.2-6.4 cm) across.

Pele's hair.
When hot, runny lava is ejected from a volcano, small drops may stretch into long, light, glassy threads as they fly through the air. These spiky, hairlike strands can be up to 3 ft (1 m) long and are often blown a few miles before landing. These threads are called Pele's hair, after Pele, the Hawaiian goddess of volcanoes.

Debris fact.
When an explosive volcano erupts, 90 percent of the ejected material is in the form of pyroclasts and volcanic ash.

Ash and dust.
When they erupt, explosive volcanoes shatter old volcanic rock into tiny pieces, hurling up vast quantities of dust, ash, and cinders. Ash clouds can billow for miles into the air and then fall like snow far around the volcano, covering hills, valleys, and villages with a choking gray layer.

Pyroclastic flow.
In some eruptions, ash and pyroclasts are not hurled skyward, but are blasted sideways or are pushed up less forcefully, falling back down onto the side of the volcano. Together, the blocks and ash form pyroclastic flows, which can move at up to 300 mph (500 km/h), incinerating everything in their path.

Tell-tale layers.
Volcanic deposits from the Vesuvius eruption of AD 79 (pp. 50-53) clearly reveal the sequence of events. The town of Pompeii was buried by 6 ft (2 m) of ash and lapilli, followed by two pyroclastic flows and a large surge.

Ash.
Volcanic ash is made up of particles less than 0.1 in (2 mm) in diameter. In an eruption, ash is ejected in huge quantities. When Alaska's Mount Katmai erupted in 1912, it left 4.8 cu miles (20 cu km) of ashfall.

Dust.
Volcanic dust is composed of tiny glass and mineral particles. It is lighter than ash and takes longer to fall to the ground. Dust can be blasted high into the stratosphere, lingering in the air for months or even years.

Tuff.
Thick ashfalls and pyroclastic flow deposits eventually are washed away by rain, or harden where they lay. When they harden, the volcanic material compacts to form a rock called tuff.

Volcanic story.
By analyzing its contents and depth, each layer of a volcano's slope can be dated. It can also show an eruption's duration and size - the amount of material it produced.

Effusive volcanoes.
Many volcanoes do not explode violently, but ooze lava almost continuously. These effusive, or flowing, volcanoes occur where the magma is fairly runny and low in gas. In basaltic magma like this, the gases have time to leak out before it reaches the surface. So the lava sprays out of the ground in a fountain of fire, or wells out as a stream of molten rock.
 
Pahoehoe lava.
Effusive volcanoes produce two types of  lava, known by their Hawaiian names of pahoehoe and aa. Pahoehoe is hot, runny free-flowing lave. Its surface cools to form a wrinkled skin. Pahoehoe typically oozes forward in shallow flows, moving at about 3 ft (1 m) a minute.

Aa lava.
When lava fountains spray molten rock up in the air, it cools and clots as it falls, creating a crumbly, lumpy lava called aa. Aa shuffles forward in surges, falling over itself like bulldozed soil.

Lava gushers.
Effusive volcanoes produce a lot of lava and hardly any ash or cinders. The lava floods out far across the landscape in broad flows - sometimes hundreds of miles across. Volcanoes like this rarely form steep-sided cones. Instead they create shallow plateaus and are called shield volcanoes.

Basalt lava facts.
Basaltic lava is less than 50 percent silica.
At over 2,192°F (1,200°C), basaltic lava is much hotter than andesitic (1,832°F/1,000°C) and dacitic (1,472°F/800°C) lavas.

Black smokers.
Tall "chimneys" belching clouds of hot black smoke exist down on the ocean floor. Research into these intriguing volcanic features has revealed that they support organisms that live at very high temperatures.

Hydrothermal vents.
Black smokers, or hydrothermal vents, form along mid-ocean ridges where tectonic plates are moving apart. Sea water seeping through cracks in the ocean floor is heated by the magma and dissolves minerals from the rock. As it is heated, the water spews from vents in scalding mineral-rich plumes. Rapid cooling leaves deposits of sulfur, iron, zinc, and copper in tall chimneys.

Manganese nodules.
Slow-forming nodules of manganese deposited by black smokers carpet the Pacific floor. These minerals may be harvested industrially in the future.

Living off chemicals.
Black smokers are home to a community of organisms that thrive in the scalding waters and toxic chemicals that would be lethal to other creatures. Elsewhere, life depends ultimately on green plants absorbing sunlight ; here, organisms depend on the bacteria that feed on the chemicals, especially hydrogen sulfide.

Black smoker facts.
Vents can be up to 165 ft (50 m) tall.
Each drop of sea water circulates through vents every ten million years.
Water jetting from black smokers can reach 1,224°F (662°C).

Volcanic islands.
Some volcanoes erupt far from plate margins. These hot-spot volcanoes occur where mantle plumes, which are rising columns of hot magma in the mantle, burn their way straight through the plate. The thin plates at the ocean floor are the ones most easily pierced by hot spots. Where the volcanoes rise above the ocean surface they form islands.

Types of volcanic island.
Volcanoes form islands in three ways. First, far from plate margins, hot-spot volcanoes eventually reach sea level. Second, eruptions along the mid-ocean ridge ultimately emerge above the surface as islands. Finally, magma can burn through from a subducted plate, forming long chains of islands called island arcs.

Black beach.
Volcanic islands often have beaches of black sand, essentially volcanic ash. Coral reefs often form around hot-spot islands, and broken coral adds flecks of pink and white to the sand.

The Hawaiian islands.
Spreading more than 1,500 miles (2,400 km) across the pacific, the Hawaiian islands are the most famous hot-spot islands. The oldest islands, to the west, have long been extinct, but Hawaii, in the East, is still active.

Conveyor-belt islands.
The Hawaiian hot spot has been in the same place for at least 75 million years, but the Pacific plate above it is moving at a rate of 4 in (10 cm) a year. As magma burns through the plate above, a new volcanic island is created over the hot spot. Each one dies out as the plate moves away from the hot-spot ; but before long, another volcanic island emerges over the pool of magma.

Hawaii facts.
Half submerges, Mauna Loa is the tallest mountain in the world.
Hawaii sits above a pool of magma 200 miles (300 km) wide.
The island of Hawaii keeps growing in size.

Volcanic disasters.
Mount Vesuvius.
One of the most famous eruptions in history took place on August 24, AD 79, when Italy's Mount Vesuvius buried the Roman empire town of Pompeii in vast quantities of hot ash. The remains of Pompeii were discovered in the 18th century, almost perfectly preserved under several feet of ash, providing a snapshot of ancient Roman life.

Vesuvius facts.
The explosion blew away the entire top of the mountain.
Up to 4 in (10 cm) of ash fell 60 miles (100 km) from Pompeii.
Before that day, Vesuvius had lain dormant for 800 years ; since then, it has erupted several times.

Ill wind.
When Vesuvius erupted, a northwest wind blew the vast cloud of ash straight toward the thriving town of Pompeii, where for two days it fell like snow.
Entombed City.
Ash buried Pompeii to a depth of 19-23 ft (6-7 m). When rain fell the next day, the ash set like concrete, preserving the town exactly as it when Vesuvius blew. After the blast, Pompeii was abandoned, and local people eventually forgot both its location and name, calling it only "the City". When archaeologists began to dig, Pompeii's culture, with its details of ancient Roman life, were revealed.

The eruption.
1) magma in an underground chamber over 6 miles (10 km) wide burst through a plug of volcanic material in Vesuvius's vent, shooting a vast cloud of pumice and ash high into the air.
2) A huge cloud of finer material spread far and wide, blotting out the sun, before slowly burying vast areas in debris. Larger fragments fell back into the hot gases and lava spewing from the volcano.
3) A deadly swirl of gases and volcanic fragments tore down the slope to Pompeii. Already overcome by ash, its inhabitants had no chance of surviving this pyroclastic surge.

Pompeii - the lost city.
When Vesuvius erupted in AD 79 and engulfed the Roman city of Pompeii, the tragedy left two remarkable legacies : the astonishing remains of both Pompeii and nearby Herculaneum and an eyewitness account of the eruption written by Pliny the Younger. He was staying across the Bay of Naples with his uncle, the Roman scholar Pliny the Elder, who died from the gases.

Carbonized food.
Food normally burns away in intense heat. At Pompeii, however, carbon dioxide in the hot gases turned the food to charcoal, so preserving Pompeiians' half-eaten meals for 2,000 years.

Victims of Vesuvius. 
More than 2,000 people died at Pompeii, their bodies encased in ash that set like cement around them. The corpses rotted, leaving just bones, but the hollow impressions of the bodies eerily showed how the unfortunate victims were caught - cowering, running, clinging together.

Pompeii facts.
Herculaneum was covered with five times more than Pompeii.
Most victims died from suffocation.

Plaster caster.
When archaeologist Giuseppe Fiorelli began working on the Pompeii site in 1860, he devised a very effective way of preserving the hollows left by the victim's bodies. Whenever a hollow was discovered, he quickly filled it with wet plaster of Paris. After the plaster hardened, the cast could safely be dug out and preserved.

Herculaneum.
When Vesuvius erupted, the Roman seaside resort of Herculaneum escaped the ashfall - but was devastated by a sudden avalanche of glowing hot ash and mud. At first archaeologists found very few bodies in the town, and it was assumed that the inhabitants must have had enough warning to flee to safety. Then, in the 1980s, beneath the massive brick arches that once stood on the shore, hundreds of skeletons were found huddled together where they had tried to escape the deadly blast.

Famous eruptions.
Every now and then, the tragic results of an eruption, or its sheer scale, leaves an indelible mark on history. In 1883, the awesome explosion of Krakatoa was heard a quarter of the way around the world. Yet a much smaller eruption on the Caribbean island of Martinique in 1903 had a far higher death toll.

Tambora, Indonesia.
The hundreds of islands of Indonesia have seen some of the world's largest volcanic explosions. In 1815, one of the biggest recorded eruptions, on Tambora, ejected 59.5 cu miles (80 cu km) of ash, compared to 2.2 cu miles (3 cu km) at Vesuvius, killing 90,000 Indonesians.

Krakatoa, west of Java.
Before it erupted in 1883, Krakatoa was an uninhabited island between Java and Sumatra. On August 26, the island blew up with such a deafening roar that the eardrums of sailors over 25 miles (40 km) away were shattered -and it was heard in Alice Springs, Australia. Dust and gas colored sunsets as far away as Europe, while the moon turned blue for months.

St Pierre, Martinique.
The destruction of St. Pierre.
Despite their awesome power, volcanoes are rarely as deadly as earthquakes because there is usually time for people to escape before their worst effects hit. But the inhabitants of St. Pierre had no chance of escape when Mount Pelée erupted on May 8, 1902. All but two of the 29,000 townspeople were incinerated in minutes by the horrific pyroclastic flow that swept down the mountain and aver the town.

Time stops.
This pocket watch found in the ruins was melted to a stop less than 20 minutes after the eruption began.

Recent eruptions.
Geological evidence shows that some volcanic eruptions in the distant past were of cataclysmic size. Although no recent one has matched these prehistoric monsters, all eruptions are headline news today. Pictures are beamed rapidly around the world, and teams of vulcanologists flock to see what they can learn.

Surtsey facts.
Within three years of forming, Surtsey was inhabited by plants, insects, and birds.
Surtsey formed where the plates of the Mid-Atlantic Ridge part.

Surtsey.
One of the most remarkable volcanic events  of recent years was the appearance of a new volcanic island that rose from the waves off Iceland almost overnight. It began on November 15, 1963, when fishermen rushed toward a cloud of dark smoke on the horizon, thinking it was a boat on fire. Within ten days, the new island of Surtsey was 3,000 ft (900 m) long and 2,165 ft (650 m) wide - it formed in a sea over 435 ft (130 m) deep.

Pinatubo, the Philippines.
In April 1991, small explosions on Mount Pinatubo, in the Philippines, warned of an eruption. When it blew in June, 100,000 people had been safely evacuated.

Mount St. Helens.
In May 1980, Mount St. Helens in Washington, began to bulge as magma welled up inside. On May 18, an avalanche on the mountain's north side allowed superheated water and magma to burst through. The huge gas blast flattened a swathe of trees 19 miles (30 km) wide.

Montserrat.
How vulnerable life can be in the shadow of an volcano became clear on the Caribbean island of Montserrat in June 1997. Regarded as a tropical paradise by both its inhabitants and visitors, few gave thought to the long-dormant volcano - until it destroyed the capital city of Plymouth, devastating the island's fragile economy.

Volcanoes and the environment.
Volcanic intrusions.
Not all volcanic activity takes place on the surface. Magma bubbling up through the crust is often trapped underground. As it pushes into overlying  rock, it forms igneous intrusions, by filling in gaps existing rock structures - concordant intrusions - or by cracking and breaking through surrounding rock - discordant intrusions.

Discordant intrusions.
Thick, viscous magma often wells up underground in dome-shaped masses called batholiths, which cool and harden slowly into granitoid rock formations. Batholiths often form the core of major mountain ranges. Sometimes, the pressure-heavy magma can break the overlying rock and harden in the cracks to form flat sheets known as dikes or larger intrusions - stocks, bosses, and cupolas.

Tor.
As softer overlying rock is weathered away, igneous intrusions can become exposed and form rocky hilltop outcrops called tors.

Batholith facts.
Batholiths cover 39 sq miles (100 sq km) at the very least.
The Coast Range Batholiths of British Columbia and Washington is more than 900 miles (1,500 km) long.

Waterfall.
Igneous intrusions often harder than the surrounding "country" rock, may eventually be exposed as country rock wears away. When a river flows aver a sill, a waterfall may form where it wears away the soft rock beneath.
Concordant intrusions.
Runny magma that cools into basaltlike rocks tends to mold itself into the country rock, following existing lines of weakness and bedding planes. Where it flows between layers, it hardens to form horizontal sheets called sills, such as Palisades Sill in New Jersey, and Salisbury Crags in Scotland. Lens-Shaped lopoliths and phacoliths form in downfolds in the rock, and laccoliths form where magma pushes up the layers in a upfold.

Steam, Mud, and geysers.
Rock and magma under the ground stay hot long after a volcano has ceased erupting and the surface has cooled. Rain or snow trickling through the ground may be heated and bubble up to the surface to form hot springs, geysers, and mud-pots, or mix gases to form fumaroles and solfataras.

Solfataras.
In places, steam from heated water mixes with sulfurous fumes from magma to create solfataras. Ancient Romans believed their spiritual underworld lay beneath the volcano. La Solfatara, near Pozzuoli, Italy, and the poet Virgil wrote of the wispy fumes as bodiless spirits.

Hot springs,
The Blue Poll in Iceland is filled with naturally hot water that emerges in hot springs after being heated underground. Many people believe that these mineral-rich waters help to cure illness and aid in relaxation.

Geysers.
Water in deep underground conduits may be superheated at pressure to over 572°F (300°C) without boiling. As water closer to the surface boils, it releases the pressure, the superheated water then flashes into steam and shoots upward. Geysers spout every time the conduit fills with water.

Crystal waterfalls.
Hot waters can dissolve minerals, which are then deposited on the surface when the water from hot springs emerges and cools. These minerals, such as travertine, can form striking rings and waterfall-like features, such as the Pummukale deposits in Turkey (above).

Geyser facts.
Old Faithful in Yellowstone National Park spouts about once an hour.
The tallest geyser is Steamboat, Wyoming, at 380 ft (115 m) high.

Mud-pots.
Where water lingers underground and easily dissolves rocks, hot water may become thick with minerals. As it oozes to the surface to form mud-pots, bubbles of mud burst at ground level with an odd plopping sound. Bathing in cooler mud-pots is thought to be good for the skin.

Fumaroles.
Fumaroles are vents that often occur on the side of volcanoes, emitting thick, often sulfurous gas. While they were once thought to be linked to dormant or dying volcanoes, it is now clear that they may warn of imminent eruptions, as they did at Mount St. Helens in 1980.

Weather and climate.
When a big volcano erupts, the effects on local weather can be dramatic. Dust clouds block sunlight, lightning bolts flash, updrafts set off violent winds, and condensing steam falls as heavy rain. If dust blasts into the stratosphere, it can also affect weather worldwide.

Scarlet skies.
The vivid, atmospheric skies of the English artist JMW Turner (1775-1951) may have been inspired by dust-filled sunsets following the eruption in Tambora, Indonesia, in 1815.

The sunless year. 
Dust thrown up by the eruption in Tambora may have cut down sunlight around the world. In 1816, the northeastern US suffered weather so cold that it was called "the year without a summer".

Dinosaur doom.
Many scientists think that the dinosaurs died out when dust clouds turned the world cold and dark. These could have resulted from a huge eruption or from the impact of a meteorite hitting Earth.

Spreading clouds.
Once dust from volcanic eruptions gets into the stratosphere, high-level winds can quickly blow it far from its source. The dust from the 1982 eruption of El Chichon, Mexico, spread around the world in just three weeks. This satellite picture shows that after Mount Pinatubo, in the Philippines, erupted on June 15,1991, it took just 40 days for dust clouds to form around the globe.

Volcanic oddities.
Volcanic activity often has spectacular results. The combination of immense heat, molten rock, sulfurous fumes, and mineral-rich water can produce a range of amazing landscapes, from salt pillars to fire fountains.

Fire fountains.
The islands of Réunion, in the Indian Ocean near Madagascar, is the world's largest volcano. Its frequent eruptions of runny magma tend to be gentle, but the vents sometimes spout glowing fountains of red-hot lava into the air.

Smoking valley.
In 1912, Mount Katmai, Alaska, erupted, emitting huge quantities of hot ash. Four years later, steam still billowed from cracks in the valley floor, so the area was named the Valley of Ten Thousand Smokes.

Le Puy, France.
The church of Le Puy in France is perched on top of a precipitous rock 60 ft (76 m) high. This rock is a hardened volcanic plug from about two million years ago. The softer ash from the volcanic cone has long since been worn away by the weather.

Karum salt pillars.
Among the strangest of all volcanic features are the Karum salt pillars in Ethiopia. They form from salt washed out of volcanic rocks and into the shallow Assale Lake. The water evaporates in the hot sunshine, leaving the lake amazingly salty. In fact, it is so salty that the surface crystallizes - and pillars of salt can grow 10 ft (3 m) overnight.

Urgüp cones, Turkey.
Ash from an eruption is usually blown or washed gradually away. Occasionally, however, it is cemented into weird shapes. At Urgüp, in central Turkey, ash was blown up into smokers, or tall chimneys, by gas fumes bubbling up within the ash. They slowly hardened into bizarrely-shaped pillars, which were later dug out for houses.

Landscape facts.
The Great Geyser in Iceland has to be stimulated into action with soap powder !
Enormous colonies of clams, or "Clam Acres" feed on black smokers under the Pacific.

Volcanoes in space.
Volcanoes have played a major part in shaping the surfaces of all the rocky planets and moons in our solar system. Our moon, for example, is covered with giant "seas", known as maria. These are believed to be basaltic lava flows on a scale that dwarfs anything found on Earth.

Volcanic inferno.
Io, one Jupiter's moons, is perhaps the most volcanically active body in the solar system. Stretched and pulled so much by the power of Jupiter's gravity, Io's interior rages like an inferno, generating almost 20 times as much internal heat as the Earth. When the Voyager space probe passed Jupiter, it identified eight active volcanoes spewing plumes of gas and dust up to 185 miles (300 km) high and 750 miles (1,200 km) wide.

Olympus Mons.
Mars's Olympus Mons is the biggest volcano in the solar system, at 15 miles (25 km) high and 375 miles (600 km) across. It is probably a hot-spot volcano. And, since Mars has no moving plates, the hot spot keeps pumping up magma in the same place, building up the volcano's cone.

Venus's volcanoes.
Radar maps of Venus made by space probes show that the planet has both ancient and active volcanoes, including a possible shield volcano 310 miles (500 km) across and 2.5 miles (4 km) high. The dense atmosphere that makes Venus hard to see may be mainly made up volcanic gases.

Unearthly volcanoes.
Volcanoes on other planets, and their moons, do not necessarily erupt the same materials as Earth's volcanoes. The colors of Io's volcanoes suggest the magma sulfur and sulfur compounds. The planet Uranus may have volcanoes that spew liquid methane instead of lava.

Volcanic products.
Igneous rocks.
Most of the Earth's crust is made of igneous rocks, which are formed volcanically as molten magma solidifies. There are two other main types of rock : sedimentary and metamorphic. All three types are linked by a continuous recycling of material called the rock cycle.

Igneous rocks. 
As soon as magma rises out of the mantle, crystals appear in the melt. The more it cools, the more crystals form until eventually it turns into hard, crystalline, igneous rock.

Metamorphic rocks.
Metamorphic rock is rock that has been transformed into a new state after being crushed by the forces that move tectonic plates or seared by the intense heat of magma. Made of very fine crystals, metamorphic rock is extremely tough.

Sedimentary rocks.
As thin layers of debris settle on the sea bed, they become compacted and cemented over millions of years into sedimentary rocks. Some, such as limestone, are made from plant or animal remains, or from chemicals settling out of water.  Most, however, are "clastic", made from bits of rock worn away by the weather.

Rock facts.
An old mountain range is made of roughly equal parts of all three rock types.
A young mountain range is mostly igneous or metamorphic rock.
Sedimentary rock often forms the bulk of coastal rocks.

Extrusive igneous rocks.
Some igneous rock is called volcanic rock because it forms from lava spewed out by a volcano. It is also called extrusive igneous rock - in contrast to intrusive igneous rock, which forms from lava ; tuff is made from volcanic ash, and pumice is hardened lava froth. In the diagram below, note how crystals form in rock.

How crystals form in rhyolite.
Molten lava may initially be too hot for crystals to form, and runs like fluid over the landscape until the lava supply runs out, or until it begins to cool and slow down.
As the lava flow slows, the surface layers begin to cool down. Small crystals of minerals with high melting points, such as feldspar, begin to grow inside the melt.
Deeper in the mix, where it takes longer to cool, feldspar crystals grow much bigger. As the lava cools, minerals such as mica crystallize into a different shape.
Eventually, as the lava cools still further, quartz begins to crystallize, but not in clusters like mica and feldspar. Instead, it fills in the gaps, binding the rock together.

Igneous rock facts.
80 percent of all volcanic rocks are basalt, and most oar fine-grained.
Sticky dacite magmas (65 percent silica) tend to form lava domes, like Mount St. Helens.

Basalt columns.
The hexagonal columns of Fingal's Cave in Scotland were formed by " flood basalts", which can spill from fissures in the crust to form plateaus hundreds of feet deep.

Rhyolite.
Pinkish rhyolite forms from the thick and sticky, highly acidic, silica-rich (73 percent) magma found in subduction zones. It piles up thickly around the vent after an explosive eruption.

Andesite.
Similar in mineral content to basalt, but a bit richer in silica (55 percent), andesite can form from block lava flows. These resemble Hawaiian aas (see p.42), but are thicker and slower-moving.

Basalt. 
Runny magma low in silica (50 percent) cools into dark-colored basalt rock. The thin layers of such magma, found along mid-ocean ridges, cool quickly, forming rock with fine crystals.

Intrusive igneous rocks.
Rocks formed from magma that hardens before reaching the surface are called intrusive igneous rocks. Hypabyssal intrusions, like dikes and sills (see p.60-61), are small and form close to the surface ; so they cool quite quickly to form medium-grained rocks. Plutonic intrusions like batholiths are much larger. They cool slowly deep underground to form rocks with big, coarse crystal grains.

Igneous outcrops.
Granite forms entirely underground ; yet it is often seen on the surface because it is tough rock that takes a long time to erode. Granite outcrops are often exposed when softer rock around them is eroded by weather and running water.

Crystal size in rock.
The quicker lava cools, the finer-grained the resulting rock is. Intrusive igneous rocks are almost always coarser than those that cool on the surface. Plutonic rock is the coarser of all.

Granite.
The commonest plutonic rock, granite occurs in big domes where tectonic plates crunch together to form mountains. This light-colored rock forms from acidic, silica-rich rhyolitic magma.

Diorite.
The coarse-grained, plutonic equivalent of andesite is diorite. It is formed when contact with other rocks adds impurities to the granitic magma, often in minor intrusions such as dikes.

Gabbro.
After granite, gabbro is the most common plutonic rock, which is the plutonic equivalent of basaltic rock, and forms in igneous intrusions called lopoliths (see p.61).

Xenoliths.
When magma solidifies to make new igneous rock, it often traps fragments of old foreign rock called xenoliths. These may be partly changed, or metamorphosed, by heat and pressure.

Factbox.
The grains in hypabyssal rocks measure 0.2-0.4 in (1-5 mm).
The grains in plutonic rocks measure 0.4 in (5 mm) or more.

Metamorphic rocks.
The immense heat and pressure created by earthquakes and volcanic activity can dramatically change rock shapes. Baked by magma or squeezed by tectonic activity, this transformation to metamorphic rock can take place on local or regional scale.

Marble David.
Marble, a beautiful rock, is a form of metamorphosed limestone. The most famous type, Carrara marble, is found in Italy, where Michelangelo (1475-1564) used it to sculpt his statue of David.

Contact metamorphism.
When rocks are altered by direct contact with hot magma - such as an igneous intrusion - the change is known as contact metamorphism.

Regional metamorphism.
Rocks can be altered as they are crushed and baked under mountain ranges thrown up by colliding tectonic plates. Intense pressure can give rocks a "foliated", or layered texture, and crystals reform in a banded pattern known as schistosity. Rocks at the heart of the activity undergo high-grade metamorphism - the most intense folding. Those further away experience low-grade change.

Metamorphic facts.
Quartz and kaolinite meld into pyrophyllite above 572°F (300°C).
Over 752°F (400°C) pyrophillite turns to andalusite or cyanite.

Slate.
Slate is a dark, gray, flaky rock, formed by low-grade regional metamorphism of mudstone and shale. Extensive pressure compacts clay and quartz minerals into smooth, flat layers.

Schist.
If medium-grade regional metamorphism acts on shale or mudstone, foliated metamorphic rock forms. Minerals recrystallize into chlorite, biotite and garnet.

Gneiss.
When mudstone, slate, or schists are subjected to high-grade regional metamorphism, a mottled rock called gneiss forms. Within this rock, bands of dark minerals alternate with lighter bands of quartz and feldspar.

Marble.
Marble is usually formed as a result of contact or regional metamorphism of limestone. Heat and pressure transform the calcite in the limestone into sugary marble.

Hot-water minerals.
Chemicals-rich water circulates underground in hydrothermal systems. Washed through cracks to cooler places, chemicals such as sulfur and copper solidify over thousands of years - forming valuable mineral deposits.

Acid attack.
Because the extreme heat vaporizes many substances, liquids and gases from volcanoes are rich in chemicals. Gas masks are needed when researching eruptions that include sulfur dioxide. Some crater lakes, like Kawah Idjen in Java, (right) are full of acid.

Sulfurous fumes.
Sulfur is one of the most common substance in hot volcanic liquids and fumes. Steam bubbling through a fumarole has the unmistakable bad-egg smell of hydrogen sulfide ; and spiky sulfur crystals form around the mouth of the vent.

Minerals from the deep.
Black smokers gave the first clue to the riches of hydrothermal deposits, covering the sea bed on either side of mid-ocean ridges with valuable compounds of sulfur, including the ores of copper, zinc, and iron.

Sulfur facts.
Sulfur is added to rubber to make it tougher - a process called vulcanization.
Sulfur and other gases are still belching from Kawah Idjen, 40 years after its last eruption.

Sulfur crystals.
As volcanic vapors cool, the sulfur they hold slowly precipitates and forms crystals. Under the right conditions, large yellow crystals grow - like those mined for centuries in Sicily.

Making gems.
Crystals form as hot magma cools. Minerals with high melting points crystallize first, changing the melt's chemical mix. As the lest of the melt crystallizes, rocks called pegmatites form; which may contain rare gems.

Amethyst.
Quartz is a common constituent of igneous rocks. In pegmatites, however, it often forms gems like rose quartz, citrine quartz, and, less commonly, purple amethyst.

Agate bubble.
Some of the best crystals are formed in geodes, or magma bubbles. Hot water, enriched by minerals from the magma, trickles through the rock and fills the geodes. As the geodes crystallize, they form gems, such as agate.

Crystal facts.
As spodumene crystal 50 ft (15 m) long was found in the Black hills of South Dakota.
A beryl crystal 33 ft (10 m) long turned up in the Bumpus Quarry near Bethel, Maine.

Massive quartz.
Tiger's eye.
Massive quartz is composed of very small grains of fibers. Sometimes, flecks of foreign mineral may replace the original mineral within the crystal. In stripy tiger's eye, tiny quartz crystals replace asbestos fibers.

Chrysoprase.
When quartz cools in a cavity, it can form solid masses of the fine-grained gem quartz chalcedony ; the most valuable type is chrysoprase, which is bright green.

Jasper.
Another type of chalcedony is jasper, which often forms in the bubbles of cools lavas. Traces of iron oxide turn it red, and actinolite or chlorite turn it green.

Gems from the deep.
Many valuable gems are formed from the crystallization of magma. Many, like ruby, sapphire, spinel, olivine, pyrope garnet, and zircon, have high melting points and simple chemical compositions. Diamond, made of pure carbon, is the simplest and hardest of all.

Diamond.
Diamond is the hardest naturally occuring mineral. Found in the rare igneous rocks kimberlite and lamproite, diamonds are often over three billion years older than the kimberlites that brings them to the surface.

Emerald.
The finest emeralds, a type of beryl, come from the Muzo and Chivor mines in Colombia. They form from mineral-rich brine trapped in cavities in limestone distorted by the movement of tectonic plates.

Eclogite.
As the basalt of a subducted ocean crust is pushed into the earth's interior, heat and pressure transform it into the rock eclogite. The carbon that forms into diamond probably came from sediments dragged down along with the ocean crust.

Sapphire.
Sapphire is one of many hard gems that crystallize at high temperatures deep in the Earth's interior. Sapphire is the blue gem form of the mineral corundum - tinted by iron and titanium. The deep cornflower-blue sapphires from Kashmir are the most valued.

Diamond facts.
The word diamond comes from the Greek word adamas, meaning unconquerable.
The largest diamond ever unearthed was the "Cullinan", from South Africa. Found in 1905, it weighed 3,106 carats - over 22 oz (620 g).

Ruby.
Another form of corundum, rubies sometimes form from magma deep in the Earth. However, the most famous rubies - the fabulous gems from the Mogok area Myanmar - were formed when minerals containing aluminum recrystallized under extreme heat and pressure.

Beryl. 
Traces of manganese turn beryl pink (morganite) and red ; iron turns it blue (aquamarine) or yellow (heliodore) ; and chromium or vanadium turns it green (emerald). Beryl usually crystallizes at fairly low temperatures in granitic pegmatites but may also form when rocks are metamorphosed.

Earthquakes.
When the Earth quakes.
Every day some part of the world is shaken by an earthquake. Some are barely strong enough to rock a cradle, while others are so violent they can destroy cities. Most occur in earthquake zones, which coincide with the cracks between tectonic plates. They are triggered by the immense forces generated as plates grind together.

How an earthquake is generated.
When one plate drags past another, the rock on either side of the crack bends and stretches. Eventually, it snaps. This sudden rupture sends shock waves, or seismic waves, shuddering through the ground at 20 times the speed of sound. The shock waves radiate outward from the hypocenter, gradually diminishing in intensity. They travel so fast, there is little warning of the impending quake.

Earthquake facts.
The major San Andreas fault lies along 600 miles (965 km) of California's coast.
The 1906 Los Angeles earthquake killed 3,000 people and left a further 250,000 homeless.

Shock sequence.
In most quakes, a few minor tremors (foreshocks) are followed by an intense burst, then a second series of minor tremors (aftershocks) over the next hour or so. The main shock may last just a few minutes, but a violent quake is enough to bring down tall buildings.

Big thumper.
By tracing earthquake vibrations, seismologists learn about the rocks underground. A vibroseis truck thumps the ground, creating artificial shock waves. Seismographs then pick up a wave pattern that reveals rock structures.

Earthquake damage.
Many of the world's major cities, including Los Angeles, Mexico City, and Tokyo, are located in major earthquake zones. The people that live in these places learn to cope with minor tremors. If a large earthquake were to strike a major city, it could cause widespread destruction and death.

Shaky ground.
The extent of damage an earthquake causes depends on its strength, the distance of a city from the epicenter, and the type of ground on which the city is built. Loose sediments can magnify a quake ; in the 1995 earthquake in Kobe, Japan, buildings built on landfill sustained the worst damage.

Earthquake facts.
The longest recorded earthquake, in Alaska on March 27, 1964, lasted just 4 minutes.
During the 1989 San Francisco quake, a vast crack 2,150 ft (650 m) long opened up in the Santa Cruz mountains.
Cities well outside earthquake zones are occasionally hit by minor tremors.

Earthquake waves.
Earthquakes generate two kinds of shock wave : body waves and surface waves. Body waves travel underground at great speed, often passing around the world. Slower surface waves move along the ground from the epicenter. They can cause far more damage.
Time lag.
A seismograph shows the arrival pattern of an earthquake's body waves. P (primary) waves arrive first, followed by slower S (secondary) waves. The time lag between the two, in this case 17 seconds, indicates how far away the hypocenter is. The measurement on the Richter scale (see pp. 94-95) is the P wave of maximum amplitude.
Quake facts.
While quakes are rare in eastern states, they affect much larger areas when they occur. The Earth's crust in the east is much less broken up so shock waves are not interrupted.
All around the world.
P waves can travel around the world in just over an hour, registering on seismographs far from the quake. Comparing readouts from two or three stations can pinpoint the quake's location. The way waves are refracted, or bent, as they pass through the Earth reveals much about its inferior.
Body waves.
P waves.
Traveling at 3 miles (5 km) per second, P waves (compressional waves) alternately squeeze and stretch the rock.
S waves.
At a slightly slower 2 miles (3 km) per second, S waves (shear waves) move the ground in a ripple up and down or side to side.
Surface waves.
Love waves.
Love, or Q waves, shake the ground from side to side in a jerky movement that can devastate high-rise buildings.
Rayleigh waves.
Rayleigh, or R waves, shake the surface up and down, often creating a visible rolling and billowing of the ground.

Earthquake measurement.
The richter scale uses seismograph readings to assess a quake's magnitude, while the Modified Mercalli scale records the quake's destructive effects. Both scales are being superceded by Moment-magnitude, which combines Richter readings with observations of rock movements.
Mercalli scale.
On a scale of I to XII, the Mercalli scale, devised by Giuseppe Mercalli (1850-1914), shows a quake's intensity in a fixed place by observing its effects. Since a quake weakens away from its epicenter, so the Mercalli rating varies according to where it is assessed.
I Movement detected by instruments.
II Felt by people resting.
III Hanging lights sway.
IV Plates and windows rattle, parked cars rock.
V Buildings tremble, liquids spill ; vibrations felt by most people.
VI Movement felt by all, pictures fall off walls, window glass shatters.
VII Bricks and tiles fall, chimneys crack, difficult to stand.
VIII Hard to steer a car, tree branches snap, chimneys fall.
IX General panic, ground cracks, mud oozes from ground.
X pipes burst, rivers flood, most buildings collapse.
XI Bridges collapse, train lines buckle, landslides occur.
XII Near total destruction, rivers change course, waves ripple ground.
Richter scale.
Devised in the 1930s by Charles Richter (1900-1985), the Richter scale measures the magnitude of a quake, or the total energy it releases on a scale o 1-10.
Magnitude vs. Intensity?
Though precise, the Richter scale does not necessarily indicate how damaging an earthquake is. Each step in the scale indicates a ten-fold increase in magnitude. However, while a Richter 7 quake may be 100 times a 6, it does not shake your house 100 times harder. It simply  lasts longer and spreads its energy wider.
Earthquake facts.
The global network of seismographs records 10 to 20 quakes a year that measure over 7 on the Richter scale.

Measuring vibrations.
The size of an earthquake can be measured by an instrument called a seismometer. The seismograph is the part of a seismometer that records earthquake vibrations, producing a seismogram, or written trace of the vibrations. This device is derived from the seismoscope, invented over 1,700 years earlier by Chinese scholar Zhang Heng.
The first seismoscope.
The bronze urn seismoscope designed by Zhang Heng (AD 78-139) was the first to detect minor tremors. When the ground shook, he pendulum stayed steady but caused a ball in one of the dragons' mouths near the top of the urn to fall.
Seismograph.
In a basic seismograph, the hanging weight stays still as the rest of the device shakes. A pen attached to the weight traces the shakes on paper. Today, the shakes are recorded electronically.
Recording earthquakes.
In Europe, earthquake recording began in the 18th century. This seismograph, made by Italian vulcanologist Luigi Palmieri (1807-96), produced a ticker tape recording of the intensity of earthquake.
Ocean bottom seismometers.
Every tremor felt around the world is recorded by a linked network of synchronized seismometers. The shock waves from any quake can be traced around the globe and the focus can be pinpointed - so the earthquake can be rated on the Richter scale. Now waterproof ocean bottom seismometers can record vibrations on the ocean floor.

Tsunamis.
When the sea bed is shaken by an earthquake or volcano, vibrations set off waves that roll along as fast as a jet plane - 435 mph (700 km/h). In deep water, tsunamis are hard to detect; but in shallow coastal waters, they rear up in giant, destructive waves.

Wave risk.
Tsunamis can travel over vast expanses of ocean. In 1960, an earthquake in Chile caused a tsunami that devastated the Japanese coast 24 hours later.
Just before a tsunami, sea level falls.
Tsunami engulfs land for up to five minutes.
Tsunamis can change the shape of the coastline.

Tsunami train.
Tsunamis generally occur in trains of 12 or more, from five minutes to an hour apart. They can engulf lowland coasts for up to five minutes.
Swift and devastating, tsunamis can sweep away entire villages before sucking debris - and even the land itself - back out to sea.

A tsunami's life begins deep beneath the ocean with an earthquake, which creates a sudden shift in the ocean bed. Water rushes into the gulf, then rebounds in giant rolling surges that ripple along the ocean floor.
Wave begins. Plates shift. Surges of water ripple outward.
Boat does not move as wave passes beneath.
In deep water, these fast-moving rolls are almost invisible on the surface, barely rocking a boat as they pass underneath it.

Water rears up. 
In shallower water, huge waves about 100 ft (30m) high appear. As the first wave arrives, the beach water is sucked away before the wave hits.

Tsunami facts.
The highest recorded tsunami, 278 ft (84m) hit Japan in 1971.
In 1883, a tsunami set off by Krakatoa swept a ship 1.5 miles (2.6 km) inland.

Mudslides and Avalanches.
Both earthquakes and volcanoes can trigger mudslides and avalanches. Though they often prove minor, they sometimes drop tons of rock, mud, or snow onto villages and towns - a peril even more deadly than the original eruption or quake itself.

Killer mud.
Volcanoes create mudflows called "lahars" when fragments of rock and ash mix with water, resulting in a slurry that can surge down steep valleys at speeds of 19-25 mph (30-40 km/h).

Water unleashed.
An earthquake's shock waves may cause high dams to crack and burst and rivers to change course. The ensuing floods cause damage and often death.

Disaster facts.
On Mount Usu, Japan, mudflows are redirected by check dams and conduits.
A quake in 1970 in the Andes set off a rock-and-ice avalanche killing 18,000 people.

Types of snow avalanche.
Slab avalanche.
Earthquakes in snowy mountain regions often set off slab avalanches. A slab of unstable layers of ice and snow - which have built up during alternate freezes and thaws - crashes down, breaking up as it falls.

Airborne powder avalanche.
Heavy snowfalls often drop dry, loose snow, which slides along the ground and comes to rest. If disturbed by a quake, it can turn into an airborne-powder avalanche.

Wet-snow avalanche.
In spring, wet-snow avalanches are a hazard. Snow becomes saturated with water and moves slowly downhill. Even a minor eruption of a snow-capped volcano may set off a snowslide.

Powder avalanche.
When fresh snow falls, it may slide downhill as it builds up. But an earthquake can trigger a powder avalanche - which bowls down the slope - compressing air in front of it and creating a destructive shock wave.

Reference Section.
Vulcanologists at work.
Vulcanologists study volcanoes to determine when they will erupt. With volcanoes that show persistent eruption patterns, the best way to forecast eruptions is to study past behavior. However, the most dangerous of explosive volcanoes are also the most erratic - and they need constant monitoring.

Hat and glove.
When scientists need to examine a volcano at close range, a hard hat, asbestos gloves, and a heat-proof suit are essential.

Metal-coated protective suit reflects heat but inhibits movement.

Looking for clues.
A crucial sign of an imminent eruption seems to be a buildup of magma beneath the volcano. Tell-tale signs of this include increases in ground temperature, rising levels of carbon dioxide in boreholes, and changes in gravity or variations in magnetic or electrical fields.

Hot rod. 
Occasionally, vulcanologists need to take samples of red-hot lava directly from a lava flow. This is a dangerous task, but a metal rod helps. From as safe a place as possible, the vulcanologist dips the pronged end of the rod into the lava flow and twists it. The prongs hook a blob of lava out of the stream.
Twisted prongs trap lava.

Watching for swelling.
Vulcanologists use hand surveying instruments like mining transit tools to make maps. They also use them to watch for any changes in the volcano's slope, such as swelling caused by the builup of magma. These may not always be accurate enough.

The quest for accuracy.
Tiltmeters use lasers to show variations in fluid level that may reveal slight changes in volcanic slopes. Space satellites, however, make the task safer and more accurate. Many stations use the Global Positioning System (GPS) to detect slight lateral movements. Other satellites use radar interferometry, where light measures tiny distances, to make maps of dangerous volcanoes.


Timeline of discovery.
The threat of volcanoes and earthquakes to cities around the world has encouraged individuals to observe and study them from the earliest times. Their discoveries are the base of our knowledge today. 
Aristotle (384-322 BC).
The Greek philosopher Artistotle, whose ideas dominated European thought for 2,000 years, was one of the first people to study earthquakes scientifically. He believed they were caused when air trapped in deep underground pockets escaped to the surface.
Zhang Heng AD 78-139.
A Chinese imperial historian and astronomer born in Nanyang, Zhang Heng made the first seismoscope to record earthquakes. He also realized - long before his Western counterparts - that moonlight comes from the sun, and lunar eclipses occur when the Earth's shadow falls on the moon.
Avicenna (980-1037).
Born near Bokhara, Turkey, Avicenna was a renowned physician to Persian sultans, known for his prodigious learning. Among his 200 or so books on scientific topics was Liber de Mineralibus, his ideas on earthquakes and geology, which dominated thinking in the field for 500 years.
Athenasius Kircher (1602-1680).
The German Jesuit Kircher, famous throughout Europe for his translations of Egyptian hieroglyphs, was among the great 17th-century scientists and writers. His book Mundus Subterraneous (The Subterranean World) showed how Earth's fiery core feeds volcanoes and heats thermal springs.
Benoît de Mailler (1656-1738).
A French diplomat and traveler, de Mailler wrote a book on earth's history called Telliamed (his name spelled backward). He was one of the first to realize our planet's advanced age. Two hundred years before anyone else, he argued Earth was over two billion years old. However, he also believed volcanoes were pockets of animal oil and fats that had become trapped in sedimentary rock and caught on fire.
Jean-Etienne Guettard (1715-1766).
A natural scientist, Guettard insisted on drawing conclusions from direct observation only and made many field trips to identify rocks. He created the first geological map of France and astounded French scientists by proving that there were once active volcanoes in the Massive Central, in France.
Nicholas Desmaret (1725-1615).
A quiet bureaucrat whose hobby was geology, Desmaret studied volcanic rocks in the French Auvergne. While Guettard and other geologists believed basalts were sedimentary rock, Desmared showed they were once lava flows that, upon cooling, formed the region's hexagonal columns.
James Hutton (1726-1797).
Scottish geologist James Hutton is considered the founder of modern geology. In his day, people believed Earth was just a few thousand years old. Hutton showed that it was much older and that the landscape was shaped gradually over millions of years. He was also the first person to realize that intrusive igneous rocks like granite were once molten rock that had emerged from deep inside the Earth.
Abraham Werner (1750-1817).
German geologist Werner was one of the "superstars" of 18th-century-geology, and people would listen to his lectures spellbound. He believed, however, that volcanoes were underground veins of coal that had caught fire and burned the way to the surface - and were insignificant geographically. Students of his - Jean d'Aubuisson, Leopold von Buch, and Alexander von Humbolt - later realized that he was wrong.

James Hall (1761-1832).
Hall, a fellow Scotsman and friend of Hutton, studied volcanoes in Italy. Many 18th-century geologists that the presence of crystal in igneous rocks proved that they had never been molten. Hall rested rocks in a hot iron foundry and showed that molten basalt forms crystals if cooled slowly.
Alexander von Humboldt (1769-1859).
One of the great scientific explorers of the 19th century, German-born Baron Humboldt went on epic South American expeditions to collect data. From studying American volcanoes, he realized that they coincided with geological faults. He also found that many rocks are igneous. 
George Scrope (1801-1875).
An English gentleman and member of Parliament, Scrope developed a passionate interest in vulcanology after visiting the Italian volcanies Stromboli and Etna. In 1825, he published Considerations on Volcanoes, in which he originated the idea that explosive eruptions were driven by expansion of gases within the magma. He later realized that the most important of these gases was water vapor.
Luigi Palmieri (1807-1896).
While observing the eruption of Italy's Mount Vesuvius in 1855, Italian scientist Luigi Palmieri realized that an instrument capable of detecting very faint tremors in the ground might help predict both earthquakes and volcanic eruptions. To detect these tremors, he invented the first true seismograph in 1855. Later, in 1872, he became a national hero when he stayed at his observatory throughout an eruption of Vesuvius.
Robert Mallet (1810-1881).
An Irish civil engineer, Mallet became interested in earthquakes and volcanoes after studying an eruption of Vesuvius in 1857. To work out how fast shock waves travel, Mallet made a map of earthquakes. It showed, for the first time, that they occur in particular zones.
Giuseppe Mercalli (1850-1914).
An Italian professor of natural sciences, Mercalli was a pioneer in seismology. His detailed observations of tremors in Italy's major earthquake districts advanced the science. In 1897, Mercalli produced his scale of earthquake intensity, which he modified several times.
John Milne (1850-1913).
Milne, a British mining engineer and professor of Geology and Mining at Tokyo University, focused his interest in quakes on seismographs and the earthquake-proofing of buildings. A sensitive seismograph he built was the first to record very distant earthquakes.
Frank Alvord Perret (1857-1940).
American vulcanologist Perret pioneered the forecasting of eruptions. Working on Vesuvius in 1906, he predicted an eruption based on a buzzing sound - the harmonic vibration of the magma mass. Using microphones to pick up vibrations, he also studied Mount Pelée, Martinique.
Thomas Hagger Junior (1871- 1953).
A firm believer in on-the-spot volcano study, this American vulcanologist set up in 1912 the first permanent volcano-observation post, on the island of Hawaii. Since then, the Hawaiian Volcano Observatory has made Kilauea the most thoroughly studied and understood volcano in the world. This observatory that Jagger founded also pioneered the use of bombing to divert lava flows.
Alfred Wegener (1880-1930).
German meteorologist Wegener seriously proposed the continental-drift theory, which holds that all the continents were once joined in one "supercontinent" - Pangea. Despite evidence matching rock strata on adjacent coasts of widely separated continents, his ideas were ridiculed.
Alfred Lacroix (1863-1948).
Lacroix arrived in Martinique on June 23, 1902, right after the eruption of Mount Pelée. He published a report on the volcano nine months later. A celebrated vulcanology text, it describes the nuée ardente, or glowing cloud, that was so deadly to the citizens of St. Pierre.
Charles Richter (1900- 1985).
Working in California during the 1930s, Richter, a seismologist, found a way to compare the size of local quakes. By measuring on a seismograph each earthquake's peaks and the distance of their focus, he devised the Richter scale. This complete scale for quake magnitude is still standard today.
Kiyoo Wadati (1902-1996).
In 1927, Japanese seismologist Wadati showed that many earthquakes start in subduction zones deep in the Earth's crust - at least 185 miles (300 km) down. When American Hugo Benioff (1899-1968) found that these zones lie near ocean trenches, they were named Benioff-Wadati zones.
Haroun Tazieff (1914-1998).
Tazieff, who was born in Poland and worked in France, was a superstar of 20th-century vulcanology. Having investigated many of the world's most famous volcanoes, he was appointed in 1984 the first French Secretary of State for the Prevention of Natural and Technological disasters. His stance at that time on evacuation in advance of potential eruptions was considered controversial.

Volcanic Records.
Some features of volcanic activity, like cone-shaped peaks, crater lakes, and recent lava flows are unmistakable. More subtly, however, every inch of the earth's surface has been affected at some time by volcanic activity, even if its signs have been eroded by the passage of billions of years.
About 130-80 million years ago, in the age of dinosaurs, huge flows of basalt lava - called flood basalts -oozed from the floors of the Pacific and Indian Oceans.
Some 60-65 million years ago, basalt gushed onto the surface in a near-continuous flow to form India's Deccan plateau. 
17 million years ago, huge molten-basalt flows from a hot spot created the Columbia plateau in Oregon and Washington.
Two million years ago, one of the world's biggest eruptions hit Yellowstone, Wyoming. Enough magma poured on to the surface to build a half-dozen Mount Fujiyamas.
In 1645 BC, the Greek island of Thera erupted, burying the Minoan city Akroteri. This may have started the Atlantis myth.
In AD 79, Vesuvius erupted, burying the ancient town of Pompeii.
In 186 Lake Taupo, in New Zealand, was created in a vast eruption.
In 300, an eruption in El Salvador left a caldera  - now Lake Ilopango. Survivors may have founded the Mayan civilization.
In 1669, Sicily's Mount Etna, Europe's largest volcano, erupted, burying Catania in lava.
In 1783, Laki mountain, Iceland, poured out lava and gases. These gases killed crops, and a fifth of Icelan's people starved.
In 1815, Tambora, in Indonesia, erupted and sent dust clouds round the world - dimming the sun.
In 1902, the town of St Pierre, on Martinique, was ruined by burning dust-clouds from Mount Pelée.
In 1963, the volcanic island of Surtsey appeared on Iceland's coast.
In 1980, Washington's Mount St Helens erupted, flattening forests.
In 1986, gases from Lake Nyos, Cameroon, killed thousands but left houses and gardens intact.
The 1991 eruption of Mount Pinatubo, Philippines, was the biggest this century.
In 1996, Grimsvotn, Iceland, erupted under the Vatnajökull glacier.
In 1997, the southern part of Montserrat and its capital were devastated.

Ash comparisons.
The amount of ash a volcano emits can indicate the size of the eruption. This diagram compares emissions of six major eruptions, in cubic miles.

Volcanic peaks.
Many high peaks are volcanic. In the Andes, there are more than ten volcanoes over 23,000 ft (7,000m). Below is a comparison of some volcanic peaks with Everest, the world's tallest mountain.
Mount Everest, at 29,028 ft (8,848m), towers over the biggest volcanoes.
Mauna Kea. Measured from the sea bed, Hawaii's Mauna Kea is taller than Mt Everest by 1,355 m (4,446 ft).

Earthquake records.
Earthquakes are brief, lasting no more than a few minutes. Yet they can cause huge casualties - far greater than those resulting from volcanic eruptions. Moreover, quakes can devastate vast areas. But, unlike volcanoes; they leave no dramatic relics - so earthquakes records are scanty.

Myths and Superstitions.
The awesome powers of volcanoes and earthquakes has long been interpreted by humans as evidence of the work of deities and mythical beings. Many cultures that have experienced quakes or volcanic eruptions have developed myths and superstitions to account for the forces that can spew liquid fire or rip apart the earth's surface. 
Voltaire.
In his book Candide, the French writer Voltaire (1694-1778) wrote about the terrible Lisbon quake of 1755. The destruction shocked Europe, but Voltaire poked fun at religious figures, hinting that God was punishing the city for its immorality. He also mocked Lisbon residents, who blamed foreigners for the disaster.
Hephaistos.
According to Greek myth, volcanoes on the island of Lemnos were caused by Hephaistos, god of fire and metalwork, who set up his forge underground.
Neptune Knocks.
Earthquakes are not uncommon in Greece, and the waters of the Aegean are often upset by tsunamis. The ancient Greeks believed that these were caused by the god of the sea Poseidon (known by the Romans as Neptune), banging angrily on the seafloor with his trident.
Hot-headed goddess.
Pele, the goddess of volcanoes, still inspires fear of the island of Hawaii. This fire-haired goddess is said to make the volcanoes erupt. When she is angry, she stamps the ground, creating earthquakes, before emerging from below riding a wave of lava, screaming curses, and hurling hot rocks.
Hollow earth.
The Earth's interior has fascinated people for centuries. Only a bit more than a century ago, the French author Jules Verne (1818-1905) wrote his Journey to the Center of the Earth. French thinker Benoît de Mailler (1656-1738) asserted that burning animal oils trapped in hollows inside the Earth caused volcanoes.
Shaky frog.
Many cultures have believed that the world was carried on the back of a giant. Ancient Hindu myth places it on the back of eight giant elephants. For Mongolians it was a frog, which shook the ground when it stumbled.

Index
Aa lava.
Andesite.
Asthenosphere.
Avalanche.
Basalt.
Batholith.
Black smoker.
Block.
Body wave.
Bombs.
Boss.
Caldera.
Composite volcano.
Contact metamorphism.
Continental drift.
Convergence zone.
Core.
Crater Lake.
Crust.
Dacite.
Dike.
Divergence zone.
Effusive volcano.
Epicenter.
Extrusive igneous rock.
Fault.
Fissure volcano.
Flood basalt.
Fumarole.
Geyser.
Hot Spot.
Hydrothermal system.
Hydrothermal vent.
Hypabyssal.
Hypocenter.
Igneous rock.
Intensity.
Intrusion.
Intrusive igneous rocks.
Island Arc.
Lahar.
Laser ranging.
Lava.
Lithosphere.
Magma.
Magma chamber.
Magnitude.
Mantle.
Mercalli scale.
Mesosphere.
Metamorphic rock.
Moment-magnitude.
Nuée ardente.
Pahoehoe lava.
Pegmatite.
Plate tectonics.
Plinian eruption.
Plug.
Plume.
Plutonic.
Pyroclast.
Pyroclastic flow.
Radar interferometry.
Regional metamorphism.
Rhyolite.
Richter scale.
Ring of scale.
Sedimentary rock.
Seismic gap.
Seismic wave.
Seismometer.
Shield volcano.
Sill.
Stratovolcano.
Subduction.
Superplume.
Surface wave.
Tectonics.
Tsunami.
Transcurrent fault.
Transform.
Vein.
Vent.
Viscosity.
Xenoliths.

<#USGS1>
*
VOLCANOES.
By Robert I. Tilling

Volcanoes destroy and volcanoes create. The catastrophic eruption of Mount St. Helens on May 18, 1980, made clear the awesome destructive power of a volcano. Yet, over a time span longer than human memory and record, volcanoes have played a key role in forming and modifying the planet upon which we live. More than 80 percent of the Earth's surface--above and below sea level--is of volcanic origin. Gaseous emissions from volcanic vents over hundreds of millions of years formed the Earth's earliest oceans and atmosphere, which supplied the ingredients vital to evolve and sustain life. Over geologic eons, countless volcanic eruptions have produced mountains, plateaus, and plains, which subsequent erosion and weathering have sculpted into majestic landscapes and formed fertile soils. 
Ironically, these volcanic soils and inviting terranes have attracted, and continue to attract, people to live on the flanks of volcanoes. Thus, as population density increases in regions of active or potentially active volcanoes, mankind must become increasingly aware of the hazards and learn not to "crowd" the volcanoes. People living in the shadow of volcanoes must live in harmony with them and expect, and should plan for, periodic violent unleashings of their pent-up energy. 
This booklet presents a generalized summary of the nature, workings, products, and hazards of the common types of volcanoes around the world, along with a brief introduction to the techniques of volcano monitoring and research. On August 24, A.D. 79, Vesuvius Volcano suddenly exploded and destroyed the Roman cities of Pompeii and Herculaneum. Although Vesuvius had shown stir-rings of life when a succession`of earthquakes in A.D. 63 caused some damage, it had been literally quiet for hundreds of years and was considered "extinct." Its surface and crater were green and covered with vegetation, so the eruption was totally unexpected. Yet in a few hours, hot volcanic ash and dust buried the two cities so thoroughly that their ruins were not uncovered for nearly 1,700 years, when the discovery of an outer wall in 1748 started a period of modern archeology. Vesuvius has continued its activity intermittently ever since A.D 79 with numerous minor eruptions and several major eruptions occurring in 1631, 1794, 1872, 1906 and in 1944 in the midst of the Italian campaign of World War II. 
In the United States on March 27, 1980, Mount St. Helens Volcano in the Cascade Range, southwestern Washington, reawakened after more than a century of dormancy and provided a dramatic and tragic reminder that there are active volcanoes in the "lower 48" States as well as in Hawaii and Alaska.The catastrophic eruption of Mount St. Helens on May 18, 1980, and related mudflows and flooding caused significant loss of life (57 dead or missing) and property damage over $1.2 billion). Mount St. Helens is expected to remain intermittently active for months or years, possibly even decades. 
The word volcano comes from the little island of Vulcano in the Mediterranean Sea off Sicily. Centuries ago, the people living in this area believed that Vulcano was the chimney of the forge of Vulcan--the blacksmith of the Roman gods. They thought that the hot lava fragments and clouds of dust erupting from Vulcano came from Vulcan's forge as he beat out thunderbolts for Jupiter, king of the gods, and weapons for Mars, the god of war. In Polynesia the people attributed eruptive activity to the beautiful but wrathful Pele, Goddess of Volcanoes, whenever she was angry or spiteful. Today we know that volcanic eruptions are not super natural but can be studied and interpreted by scientists. 


The Nature of Volcanoes.


Volcanoes are mountains but they are very different from other mountains. They are not formed by folding and crumpling but by uplift and erosion. Instead, volcanoes are built by the accumulation of their own eruptive products--lava, bombs (crusted over ash flows, and tephra (airborne ash and dust). A volcano is most commonly a conical hill or mountain built around a vent that connects with reservoirs of molten rock below the surface of the Earth . The term volcano also refers to the opening or vent through which the molten rock and associated gases are expelled. 
Driven by buoyancy and gas pressure the molten rock, which is lighter than the surrounding solid rock forces its way upward and may ultimately break though zones of weaknesses in the Earth's crust. If so, an eruption begins, and the molten rock may pour from the vent as non-explosive lava flows, or if may shoot violently into the air as dense clouds of lava fragments. Larger fragments fall back around the vent, and accumulations of fall-back fragments may move downslope as ash flows under the force of gravity. Some of the finer ejected materiaIs may be carried by the wind only to fall to the ground many miles away. The finest ash particles may be injected miles into the atmosphere and carried many times around the world by stratospheric winds before settling out.
Molten rock below the surface of the Earth that rises in volcanic vents is known as magma, but after it erupts from a volcano it is called lava. Originating many tens of miles beneath the ground, the ascending magma commonly contains some crystals, fragments of surrounding (unmelted) rocks, and dissolved gases, but it is primarily a liquid composed principally of oxygen, silicon, aluminum, iron, magnesium, calcium, sodium, potassium, titanium, and manganese. Magmas also contain many other chemical elements in trace quantities. Upon cooling, the liquid magma may precipitate crystals of various minerals until solidification is complete to form an igneous or magmatic rock.
The diagram below shows that heat concentrated in the Earth's upper mantle raises temperatures sufficiently to melt the rock locally by fusing the materials with the lowest melting temperatures, resulting in small, isolated blobs of magma. These blobs then collect, rise through conduits and fractures, and some ultimately may re-collect in larger pockets or reservoirs ("holding tanks") a few miles beneath the Earth's surface. Mounting pressure within the reservoir may drive the magma further upward through structurally weak zones to erupt as lava at the surface. In a continental environment, magmas are generated in the Earth's crust as well as at varying depths in the upper mantle. The variety of molten rocks in the crust, plus the possibility of mixing with molten materials from the underlying mantle, leads to the production of magmas with widely different chemical compositions. 
If magmas cool rapidly, as might be expected near or on the Earth's surface, they solidify to form igneous rocks that are finely crystalline or glassy with few crystals. Accordingly, lavas, which of course are very rapidly cooled, form volcanic rocks typically characterized by a small percentage of crystals or fragments set in a matrix of glass (quenched or super-cooled magma) or finer grained crystalline materials. If magmas never breach the surface to erupt and remain deep underground, they cool much more slowly and thus allow ample time to sustain crystal precipitation and growth, resulting in the formation of coarser grained, nearly completely crystalline, igneous rocks. Subsequent to final crystallization and solidification, such rocks can be exhumed by erosion many thousands or millions of years later and be exposed as large bodies of so-called granitic rocks, as, for example, those spectacularly displayed in Yosemite National Park and other parts of the majestic Sierra Nevada mountains of California.
Lava is red hot when it pours or blasts out of a vent but soon changes to dark red, gray, black, or some other color as it cools and solidifies. Very hot, gas-rich lava containing abundant iron and magnesium is fluid and flows like hot tar, whereas cooler, gas-poor lava high in silicon, sodium, and potassium flows sluggishly, like thick honey in some cases or in others like pasty, blocky masses. 
All magmas contain dissolved gases, and as they rise to the surface to erupt, the confining pressures are reduced and the dissolved gases are liberated either quietly or explosively. If the lava is a thin fluid (not viscous), the gases may escape easily. But if the lava is thick and pasty (highly viscous), the gases will not move freely but will build up tremendous pressure, and ultimately escape with explosive violence. Gases in lava may be compared with the gas in a bottle of a carbonated soft drink. If you put your thumb over the top of the bottle and shake it vigorously, the gas separates from the drink and forms bubbles. When you remove your thumb abruptly, there is a miniature explosion of gas and liquid. The gases in lava behave in somewhat the same way. Their sudden expansion causes the terrible explosions that throw out great masses of solid rock as well as lava, dust, and ashes. 
The violent separation of gas from lava may produce rock froth called pumice. Some of this froth is so light--because of the many gas bubbles--that it floats on water. In many eruptions, the froth is shattered explosively into small fragments that are hurled high into the air in the form of volcanic cinders (red or black), volcanic ash (commonly tan or gray), and volcanic dust. 



Principal Types of Volcanoes.


Geologists generally group volcanoes into four main kinds--cinder cones, composite volcanoes, shield volcanoes, and lava domes. 



Cinder cones.
Cinder cones are the simplest type of volcano. They are built from particles and blobs of congealed lava ejected from a single vent. As the gas-charged lava is blown violently into the air, it breaks into small fragments that solidify and fall as cinders around the vent to form a circular or oval cone. Most cinder cones have a bowl-shaped crater at the summit and rarely rise more than a thousand feet or so above their surroundings. Cinder cones are numerous in western North America as well as throughout other volcanic terrains of the world. 
In 1943 a cinder cone started growing on a farm near the village of Parícutin in Mexico. Explosive eruptions caused by gas rapidly expanding and escaping from molten lava formed cinders that fell back around the vent, building up the cone to a height of 1,200 feet. The last explosive eruption left a funnel-shaped crater at the top of the cone. After the excess gases had largely dissipated, the molten rock quietly poured out on the surrounding surface of the cone and moved downslope as lava flows. This order of events--eruption, formation of cone and crater, lava flow--is a common sequence in the formation of cinder cones. During 9 years of activity, Parícutin built a prominent cone, covered about 100 square miles with ashes, and destroyed the town of San Juan. Geologists from many parts of the world studied Parícutin during its lifetime and learned a great deal about volcanism, its products, and the modification of a volcanic landform by erosion. 


Composite volcanoes.
Some of the Earth's grandest mountains are composite volcanoes--sometimes called stratovolcanoes. They are typically steep-sided, symmetrical cones of large dimension built of alternating layers of lava flows, volcanic ash, cinders, blocks, and bombs and may rise as much as 8,000 feet above their bases. Some of the most conspicuous and beautiful mountains in the world are composite volcanoes, including Mount Fuji in Japan, Mount Cotopaxi in Ecuador, Mount Shasta in California, Mount Hood in Oregon, and Mount St. Helens and Mount Rainier in Washington. 
Most composite volcanoes have a crater at the summit which contains a central vent or a clustered group of vents. Lavas either flow through breaks in the crater wall or issue from fissures on the flanks of the cone. Lava, solidified within the fissures, forms dikes that act as ribs which greatly strengthen the cone. 
The essential feature of a composite volcano is a conduit system through which magma from a reservoir deep in the Earth's crust rises to the surface. The volcano is built up by the accumulation of material erupted through the conduit and increases in size as lava, cinders, ash, etc., are added to its slopes.When a composite volcano becomes dormant, erosion begins to destroy the cone. As the cone is stripped away, the hardened magma filling the conduit (the volcanic plug) and fissures (the dikes) becomes exposed, and it too is slowly reduced by erosion. Finally, all that remains is the plug and dike complex projecting above the land surface--a telltale remnant of the vanished volcano. 
An interesting variation of a composite volcano can be seen at Crater Lake in Oregon. From what geologists can interpret of its past, a high volcano--called Mount Mazama- probably similar in appearance to present-day Mount Rainier was once located at this spot. Following a series of tremendous explosions about 6,800 years ago, the volcano lost its top. Enormous volumes of volcanic ash and dust were expelled and swept down the slopes as ash flows and avalanches. These large-volume explosions rapidly drained the lava beneath the mountain and weakened the upper part. The top then collapsed to form a large depression, which later filled with water and is now completely occupied by beautiful Crater Lake. A last gasp of eruptions produced a small cinder cone, which rises above the water surface as Wizard Island near the rim of the lake. Depressions such as Crater Lake, formed by collapse of volcanoes, are known as calderas. They are usually large, steep-walled, basin-shaped depressions formed by the collapse of a large area over, and around, a volcanic vent or vents. Calderas range in form and size from roughly circular depressions 1 to 15 miles in diameter to huge elongated depressions as much as 60 miles long. 



Shield volcanoes.
Shield volcanoes, the third type of volcano, are built almost entirely of fluid lava flows. Flow after flow pours out in all directions from a central summit vent, or group of vents, building a broad, gently sloping cone of flat, domical shape, with a profile much like that of a warrior's shield. They are built up slowly by the accretion of thousands of highly fluid lava flows called basalt lava that spread widely over great distances, and then cool as thin, gently dipping sheets. Lavas also commonly erupt from vents along fractures (rift zones) that develop on the flanks of the cone. Some of the largest volcanoes in the world are shield volcanoes. In northern California and Oregon, many shield volcanoes have diameters of 3 or 4 miles and heights of 1,500 to 2,000 feet. The Hawaiian Islands are composed of linear chains of these volcanoes including Kilauea and Mauna Loa on the island of Hawaii-- two of the world's most active volcanoes. The floor of the ocean is more than 15,000 feet deep at the bases of the islands. As Mauna Loa, the largest of the shield volcanoes (and also the world's largest active volcano), projects 13,677 feet above sea level, its top is over 28,000 feet above the deep ocean floor. In some eruptions, basaltic lava pours out quietly from long fissures instead of central vents and floods the surrounding countryside with lava flow upon lava flow, forming broad plateaus. Lava plateaus of this type can be seen in Iceland, southeastern Washington, eastern Oregon, and southern Idaho. Along the Snake River in Idaho, and the Columbia River in Washington and Oregon, these lava flows are beautifully exposed and measure more than a mile in total thickness. 



Lava domes.
Volcanic or lava domes are formed by relatively small, bulbous masses of lava too viscous to flow any great distance; consequently, on extrusion, the lava piles over and around its vent. A dome grows largely by expansion from within. As it grows its outer surface cools and hardens, then shatters, spilling loose fragments down its sides. Some domes form craggy knobs or spines over the volcanic vent, whereas others form short, steep-sided lava flows known as "coulees." Volcanic domes commonly occur within the craters or on the flanks of large composite volcanoes. The nearly circular Novarupta Dome that formed during the 1912 eruption of Katmai Volcano, Alaska, measures 800 feet across and 200 feet high. The internal structure of this dome--defined by layering of lava fanning upward and outward from the center--indicates that it grew largely by expansion from within. Mont Pelée in Martinique, Lesser Antilles, and Lassen Peak and Mono domes in California are examples of lava domes. An extremely destructive eruption accompanied the growth of a dome at Mont Pelée in 1902. The coastal town of St. Pierre, about 4 miles downslope to the south, was demolished and nearly 30,000 inhabitants were killed by an incandescent, high-velocity ash flow and associated hot gases and volcanic dust. 
Only two men survived; one because he was in a poorly ventilated, dungeon-like jail cell and the other who somehow made his way safely through the burning city. 



Other Volcanic Structures.



Plugs (necks).
Congealed magma, along with fragmental volcanic and wallrock materials, can be preserved in the feeding conduits of a volcano upon cessation of activity. These preserved rocks form crudely cylindrical masses, from which project radiating dikes; they may be visualized as the fossil remains of the innards of a volcano (the so-called "volcanic plumbing system") and are referred to as volcanic plugs or necks. The igneous material in a plug may have a range of composition similar to that of associated lavas or ash, but may also include fragments and blocks of denser, coarser grained rocks-- higher in iron and magnesium, lower in silicon--thought to be samples of the Earth's deep crust or upper mantle plucked and transported by the ascending magma. Many plugs and necks are largely or wholly composed of fragmental volcanic material and of fragments of wallrock, which can be of any type. Plugs that bear a particularly strong imprint of explosive eruption of highly gas-charged magma are called diatremes or tuff-breccia. 
Volcanic plugs are believed to overlie a body of magma which could be either still largely liquid or completely solid depending on the state of activity of the volcano. Plugs are known, or postulated, to be commonly funnel shaped and to taper downward into bodies increasingly elliptical in plan or elongated to dike-like forms. Typically, volcanic plugs and necks tend to be more resistant to erosion than their enclosing rock formations. Thus, after the volcano becomes inactive and deeply eroded, the exhumed plug may stand up in bold relief as an irregular, columnar structure. One of the best known and most spectacular diatremes in the United States is Ship Rock in New Mexico, which towers some 1,700 feet above the more deeply eroded surrounding plains. Volcanic plugs, including diatremes, are found elsewhere in the western United States and also in Germany, South Africa, Tanzania, and Siberia. 



Maars.
Also called "tuff cones," maars are shallow, flat-floored craters that scientists interpret have formed above diatremes as a result of a violent expansion of magmatic gas or steam; deep erosion of a maar presumably would expose a diatreme. Maars range in size from 200 to 6,500 feet across and from 30 to 650 feet deep, and most are commonly filled with water to form natural lakes. Most maars have low rims composed of a mixture of loose fragments of volcanic rock and rocks torn from the walls of the diatreme. 
Maars occur in the western United States, in the Eifel region of Germany, and in other geologically young volcanic regions of the world. An excellent example of a maar is Zuni Salt Lake in New Mexico, a shallow saline lake that occupies a flat-floored crater about 6,500 feet across and 400 feet deep. Its low rim is composed of loose pieces of basaltic lava and wallrocks (sandstone, shale, limestone) of the underlying diatreme, as well as random chunks of ancient crystalline rocks blasted upward from great depths. 



Nonvolcanic craters.
Some well-exposed, nearly circular areas of intensely deformed sedimentary rocks, in which a central vent-like feature is surrounded by a ring-shaped depression, resemble volcanic structures in gross form. As no clear evidence of volcanic origin could be found in or near these structures, scientists initially described them as "cryptovolcanic," a term now rarely used. Recent studies have shown that not all craters are of volcanic origin. Impact craters, formed by collisions with the Earth of large meteorites, asteroids, or comets, share with volcanoes the imprints of violent origin, as evidenced by severe disruption, and even local melting, of rock. Fragments of meteorites or chemically detectable traces of extraterrestrial materials and indications of strong forces acting from above, rather than from below, distinguish impact from volcanic features. Other possible explanations for these nonvolcanic craters include subsurface salt-dome intrusion (and subsequent dissolution and collapse caused by subsurface limestone dissolution and/or ground-water withdrawal; and collapse related to melting of glacial ice. An impressive example of an impact structure is Meteor Crater, Ariz., which is visited by thousands of tourists each year. This impact crater, 4,000 feet in diameter and 600 feet deep, was formed in the geologic past (probably 30,00050,000 years before present) by a meteorite striking the Earth at a speed of many thousands of miles per hour. In addition to Meteor Crater, very fresh, morphologically distinct, impact craters are found at three sites near Odessa, Tex., as well as 10 or 12 other locations in the world. Of the more deeply eroded, less obvious, postulated impact structures, there are about ten well-established sites in the United States and perhaps 80 or ~0 elsewhere in the world. 



Types of Volcanic Eruptions.


During an episode of activity, a volcano commonly displays a distinctive pattern of behavior. Some mild eruptions merely discharge steam and other gases, whereas other eruptions quietly extrude quantities of lava. The most spectacular eruptions consist of violent explosions that blast great clouds of gas-laden debris into the atmosphere. 
The type of volcanic eruption Is often labeled with the name of a well-known volcano where characteristic behavior is similar--hence the use of such terms as "Strombolian," "Vulcanian," "Vesuvian," "Pelean," "Hawaiian," and others. Some volcanoes may exhibit only one characteristic type of eruption during an interval of activity--others may display an entire sequence of types. 
In a Strombolian-type eruption observed during the 1965 activity of Irazu Volcano in Costa Rica, huge clots of molten lava burst from the summit crater to form luminous arcs through the sky. Collecting on the flanks of the cone, lava clots combined to stream down the slopes in fiery rivulets. 
In contrast, the eruptive activity of Parícutin Volcano in 1947 demonstrated a "Vulcanian"-type eruption, in which a dense cloud of ash-laden gas explodes from the crater and rises high above the peak. Steaming ash forms a whitish cloud near the upper level of the cone. 
In a "Vesuvian" eruption, as typified by the eruption of Mount Vesuvius in Italy in A.D. 79, great quantities of ash-laden gas are violently discharged to form cauliflower-shaped cloud high above the volcano. 
In a "Peléan" or "Nuée Ardente (glowing cloud) eruption, such as occurred on the Mayon Volcano in the Philippines in 1968, a large quantity of gas, dust, ash, and incandescent lava fragments are blown out of a central crater, fall back, and form tongue-like, glowing avalanches that move downslope at velocities as great as 100 miles per hour. Such eruptive activity can cause great destruction and loss of life if it occurs in populated areas, as demonstrated by the devastation of St. Pierre during the 1902 eruption of Mont Pelée on Martinique, Lesser Antilles. 
"Hawaiian" eruptions may occur along fissures or fractures that serve as linear vents, such as during the eruption of Mauna Loa Volcano in Hawaii in 1950; or they may occur at a central vent such as during the 1959 eruption in Kilauea Iki Crater of Kilauea Volcano, Hawaii. In fissure-type eruptions, molten, incandescent lava spurts from a fissure on the volcano's rift zone and feeds lava streams that flow downslope. In central-vent eruptions, a fountain of fiery lava spurts to a height of several hundred feet or more. Such lava may collect in old pit craters to form lava lakes, or form cones, or feed radiating flows. 
"Phreatic" (or steam-blast) eruptions are driven by explosive expanding steam resulting from cold ground or surface water coming into contact with hot rock or magma. The distinguishing feature of phreatic explosions is that they only blast out fragments of preexisting solid rock from the volcanic conduit; no new magma is erupted. Phreatic activity is generally weak, but can be quite violent in some cases, such as the 1965 eruption of Taal Volcano, Philippines, and the 1975-76 activity at La Soufrière, Guadeloupe (Lesser Antilles). 
The most powerful eruptions are called "plinian" and involve the explosive ejection of relatively viscous lava. Large plinian eruptions--such as during 18 May 1980 at Mount St. Helens or, more recently, during 15 June 1991 at Pinatubo in the Philippines--can send ash and volcanic gas tens of miles into the air. The resulting ash fallout can affect large areas hundreds of miles downwind. Fast-moving deadly pyroclastic flows ("nuées ardentes") are also commonly associated with plinian eruptions. 



Submarine Volcanoes.


Submarine volcanoes and volcanic vents are common features on certain zones of the ocean floor. Some are active at the present time and, in shallow water, disclose their presence by blasting steam and rock-debris high above the surface of the sea. Many others lie at such great depths that the tremendous weight of the water above them results in high, confining pressure and prevents the formation and explosive release of steam and gases. Even very large, deep-water eruptions may not disturb the ocean surface. 
The unlimited supply of water surrounding submarine volcanoes can cause them to behave differently from volcanoes on land. Violent, steam-blast eruptions take place when sea water pours into active shallow submarine vents. Lava, erupting onto a shallow sea floor or flowing into the sea from land, may cool so rapidly that it shatters into sand and rubble. The result is the production of huge amounts of fragmental volcanic debris. The famous "black sand" beaches of Hawaii were created virtually instantaneously by the violent interaction between hot lava and sea water. On the other hand, recent observations made from deep-diving submersibles have shown that some submarine eruptions produce flows and other volcanic structures remarkably similar to those formed on land. Recent studies have revealed the presence of spectacular, high temperature hydrothermal plumes and vents (called "smokers") along some parts of the mid-oceanic volcanic rift systems. However, to date, no direct observation has been made of a deep submarine eruption In progress. 
During an explosive submarine eruption in the shallow open ocean, enormous piles of debris are built up around the active volcanic vent. Ocean currents rework the debris in shallow water, while other debris slumps from the upper part of the cone and flows into deep water along the sea floor. Fine debris and ash in the eruptive plume are scattered over a wide area in airborne clouds. Coarse debris in the same eruptive plume rains into the sea and settles on the flanks of the cone. Pumice from the eruption floats on the water and drifts with the ocean currents over a large area. 



Geysers, Fumaroles, and Hot Springs.


Geysers, fumaroles (also called solfataras), and hot springs are generally found in regions of young volcanic activity. Surface water percolates downward through the rocks below the Earth's surface to high-temperature regions surrounding a magma reservoir, either active or recently solidified but still hot. There the water is heated, becomes less dense, and rises back to the surface along fissures and cracks. Sometimes these features are called "dying volcanoes" because they seem to represent the last stage of volcanic activity as the magma, at depth, cools and hardens. 
Erupting geysers provide spectacular displays of underground energy suddenly unleashed, but their mechanisms are not completely understood. Large amounts of hot water are presumed to fill underground cavities. The water, upon further heating, is violently ejected when a portion of it suddenly flashes into steam. This cycle can be repeated with remarkable regularity, as for example, at Old Faithful Geyser in Yellowstone National Park, which erupts on an average of about once every 65 minutes. 
Fumaroles, which emit mixtures of steam and other gases, are fed by conduits that pass through the water table before reaching the surface of the ground. Hydrogen sulfide (H2S), one of the typical gases issuing from fumaroles, readily oxidizes to sulfuric acid and native sulfur. This accounts for the intense chemical activity and brightly colored rocks in many thermal areas. 
Hot springs occur in many thermal areas where the surface of the Earth intersects the water table. The temperature and rate of discharge of hot springs depend on factors such as the rate at which water circulates through the system of underground channelways, the amount of heat supplied at depth, and the extent of dilution of the heated water by cool ground water near the surface. 



Volcano Environments.


There are more than 500 active volcanoes (those that have erupted at least once within recorded history) in the world--50 of which are in the United States (Hawaii, Alaska, Washington, Oregon, and California)--although many more are hidden under the seas. Most active volcanoes are strung like beads along, or near, the margins of the continents, and more than half en circle the Pacific Ocean as a "Ring of Fire." 
Many volcanoes are in and around the Mediterranean Sea. Mount Etna in Sicily is the largest and hiqhest of these mountains. Italy's Vesuvius is the only active volcano on the European mainland. Near the island of Vulcano, the volcano Stromboli has been in a state of nearly continuous, mild eruption since early Roman times. At night, sailors in the Mediterranean can see the glow from the fiery molten material that is hurled into the air. Very appropriately, Stromboli has been called "the lighthouse of the Mediterranean. Some volcanoes crown island areas lying near the continents, and others form chains of islands in the deep ocean basins. Volcanoes tend to cluster along narrow mountainous belts where folding and fracturing of the rocks provide channelways to the surface for the escape of magma. Significantly, major earthquakes also occur along these belts, indicating that volcanism and seismic activity are often closely related, responding to the same dynamic Earth forces. 

In a typical "island-arc" environment, volcanoes lie along the crest of an arcuate, crustal ridge bounded on its convex side by a deep oceanic trench. The granite or granitelike layer of the continental crust extends beneath the ridge to the vicinity of the trench. Basaltic magmas, generated in the mantle beneath the ridge, rise along fractures through the granitic layer. These magmas commonly will be modified or changed in composition during passage through the granitic layer and erupt on the surface to form volcanoes built largely of nonbasaltic rocks. 
In a typical "oceanic" environment, volcanoes are alined along the crest of a broad ridge that marks an active fracture system in the oceanic crust. Basaltic magmas, generated in the upper mantle beneath the ridge, rise along fractures through the basaltic layer. Because the granitic crustal layer is absent, the magmas are not appreciably modified or changed in composition and they erupt on the surface to form basaltic volcanoes. 
In the typical "continental" environment, volcanoes are located unstable, mountainous belts that have thick roots of granite or granitelike rock. Magmas, generated near the base of the mountain root, rise slowly or intermittently along fractures in the crust. During passage through the granitic layer, magmas are commonly modified or changed in composition and erupt on the surface to form volcanoes constructed of nonbasaltic rocks. 



Plate-Tectonics Theory.


According to the now generally accepted "plate-tectonics" theory, scientists believe that the Earth's surface is broken into a number of shifting slabs or plates, which average about 50 miles in thickness. These plates move relative to one another above a hotter, deeper, more mobile zone at average rates as great as a few inches per year. Most of the world's active volcanoes are located along or near the boundaries between shifting plates and are called "plate-boundary" volcanoes. However, some active volcanoes are not associated with plate boundaries, and many of these so-called "intra-plate" volcanoes form roughly linear chains in the interior of some oceanic plates. The Hawaiian Islands provide perhaps the best example of an "intra-plate" volcanic chain, developed by the northwest-moving Pacific plate passing over an inferred "hot spot" that initiates the magma-generation and volcano formation process. The peripheral areas of the Pacific Ocean Basin, containing the boundaries of several plates, are dotted by many active volcanoes that form the so-called "Ring of Fire." The "Ring" provides excellent examples of "plate boundary" volcanoes, including Mount St. Helens. 
The accompanying figure shows the boundaries of lithosphere plates that are presently active. The double lines indicate zones of spreading from which plates are moving apart. The lines with barbs show zones of underthrusting (subduction), where one plate is sliding beneath another. The barbs on the lines indicate the overriding plate. The single line defines a strike-slip fault along which plates are sliding horizontally past one another. The stippled areas indicate a part of a continent, exclusive of that along a plate boundary, which is undergoing active extensional, compressional, or strike-slip faulting. 



Extraterrestrial Volcanism.


Volcanoes and volcanism are not restricted to the planet Earth. M \anned and unmanned planetary explorations, beginning in the late 1960's, have furnished graphic evidence of past volcanism and its products on the Moon, Mars, Venus and other planetary bodies. Many pounds of volcanic rocks were collected by astronauts during the various Apollo lunar landing missions. Only a small fraction of these samples have been subjected to exhaustive study by scientists. The bulk of the material is stored under controlled-environment conditions at NASA's Lunar Receiving Laboratory in Houston, Tex., for future study by scientists. 
From the 1976-1979 Viking mission, scientists have been able to study the volcanoes on Mars, and their studies are very revealing when compared with those of volcanoes on Earth. For example, Martian and Hawaiian volcanoes closely resemble each other in form. Both are shield volcanoes, have gently sloping flanks, large multiple collapse pits at their centers, and appear to be built of fluid lavas that have left numerous flow features on their flanks. The most obvious difference between the two is size. The Martian shields are enormous. They can grow to over 17 miles in height and more than 350 miles across, in contrast to a maximum height of about 6 miles and width of 74 miles for the Hawaiian shields. 
Voyager-2 spacecraft images taken of lo, a moon of Jupiter, captured volcanoes in the actual process of eruption. The volcanic plumes shown on the image rise some 60 to 100 miles above the surface of the moon. Thus, active volcanism is taking place, at present, on at least one planetary body in addition to our Earth. 



Volcano Monitoring and Research.


It has been said that the science of "volcanology" originated with the accurate descriptions of the eruption of Vesuvius in A.D. 79 contained in two letters from Pliny the Younger to the Roman historian Tacitus. Pliny's letters also described the death of his uncle, Pliny the Elder, who was killed in the eruption. Actually, however, it was not until the 19th century that serious scientific inquiry into volcanic phenomena flourished as part of the general revolution in the physical and life sciences, including the new science of "geology." In 1847, an observatory was established on the flanks of Vesuvius, upslope from the site of Herculaneum, for the more or less continuous recording of the activity of the volcano that destroyed the city in A.D. 79. Still, through the first decade of the 20th century, the study of volcanoes by and large continued to be of an expeditionary nature, generally undertaken after the eruption had begun or the activity had ceased. 
Perhaps "modern" volcanology began in 1912, when Thomas A. Jaggar, Head of the Geology Department of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, founded the Hawaiian Volcano Observatory (HVO), located on the rim of Kilauea's caldera. Initially supported by an association of Honolulu businessmen, HVO began to conduct systematic and continuous monitoring of seismic activity preceding, accompanying, and following eruptions, as well as a wide variety of other geological, geophysical, and geochemical observations and investigations. Between 1919 and 1948, HVO was administered by various Federal agencies (National Weather Service, U.S. Geological Survey, and National Park Service), and since 1948 it has been operated continuously by the Geological Survey as part of its Volcano Hazards Program. The more than 75 years of comprehensive investigations by HVO and other scientists in Hawaii have added substantially to our understanding of the eruptive mechanisms of Kilauea and Mauna Loa, two of the world's most active volcanoes. Moreover, the Hawaiian Volcano Observatory pioneered and refined most of the commonly used volcano-monitoring techniques presently employed by other observatories monitoring active volcanoes elsewhere, principally in Indonesia, Italy, Japan, Latin America, New Zealand, Lesser Antilles (Caribbean), Philippines, and Kamchatka (U .S.S.R.). 
What does "volcano monitoring" actually involve? Basically, it is the keeping of a detailed "diary" of the changes--visible and invisible--in a volcano and its surroundings. Between eruptions, visible changes of importance to the scientists would include marked increase or decrease of steaming from known vents; emergence of new steaming areas; development of new ground cracks or widening of old ones; unusual or inexplicable withering of plant life; changes in the color of mineral deposits encrusting fumaroles; and any other directly observable, and often measurable, feature that might reflect a change in the state of the volcano. Of course, the "diary" keeping during eruptive activity presents additional tasks. Wherever and whenever they can do so safely, scientists document, in words and on film, the course of the eruption in detail; make temperature measurements of lava and gas; collect the eruptive products and gases for subsequent laboratory analysis; measure the heights of lava fountains or ash plumes; gage the flow rate of ash ejection or lava flows; and carry out other necessary observations and measurements to fully document and characterize the eruption. For each eruption, such documentation and data collection and analysis provide another building block in constructing a model of the characteristic behavior of a given volcano or type of eruption. Volcano monitoring also involves the recording and analysis of volcanic phenomena not visible to the human eye, but measurable by precise and sophisticated instruments. These phenomena include ground movements, earthquakes (particularly those too small to be felt by people), variations in gas compositions, and deviations in local electrical and magnetic fields that respond to pressure and stresses caused by the subterranean magma movements. 
Some common methods used to study invisible, volcano-related phenomena are based on: 
1. Measurement of changes in the shape of the volcano-- volcanoes gradually swell or "inflate" in building up to an eruption because of the influx of magma into the volcano's reservoir or "plumbing system"; with the onset of eruption, pressure is immediately relieved and the volcano rapidly shrinks or "deflates." A wide variety of instruments, including precise spirit-levels, electronic "tiltmeters, and electronic-laser beam instruments, can measure changes in the slope or "tilt" of the volcano or in vertical and horizontal distances with a precision of only a few parts in a million. 

2. Precise determination of the location and magnitude of earthquakes by a well-designed seismic network--as the volcano inflates by the rise of magma, the enclosing rocks are deformed to the breaking point to accommodate magma movement. When the rock ultimately fails to permit continued magma ascent, earthquakes result. By carefully mapping out the variations with time in the locations and depths of earthquake foci, scientists in effect can track the subsurface movement of magma, horizontally and vertically. 

3. Measurement of changes in volcanic-gas composition and in magnetic field--the rise of magma high into the volcanic edifice may allow some of the associated gases to escape along fractures, thereby causing the composition of the gases (measured at the surface) to differ from that usually measured when the volcano is quiescent and the magma is too deep to allow gas to escape. Changes in the Earth's magnetic field have been noted preceding and accompanying some eruptions, and such changes are believed to reflect temperature effects and/or the content of magnetic minerals in the magma. 
Recording historic eruptions and modern volcano-monitoring in themselves are insufficient to fully determine the characteristic behavior of a volcano, because a time record of such information, though perhaps long in human terms, is much too short in geologic terms to permit reliable predictions of possible future behavior. A comprehensive investigation of any volcano must also include the careful, systematic mapping of the nature, volume, and distribution of the products of prehistoric eruptions, as well as the determination of their ages by modern isotopic and other dating methods. Research on the volcano's geologic past extends the data base for refined estimates of the recurrence intervals of active versus dormant periods in the history of the volcano. With such information in hand, scientists can construct so-called "volcanic hazards" maps that delineate the zones of greatest risk around the volcano and that designate which zones are particularly susceptible to certain types of volcanic hazards (lava flows, ash fall, toxic gases, mudflows and associated flooding, etc.). A strikingly successful example of volcano research and volcanic hazard assessment was the 1978 publication (Bulletin 1383-C) by two Geological Survey scientists, Dwight Crandell and Donal Mullineaux, who concluded that Mount St. Helens was the Cascade volcano most frequently active in the past 4,500 years and the one most likely to reawaken to erupt, "...perhaps before the end of this century." Their prediction came true when Mount St. Helens rumbled back to life in March of 1980. Intermittent explosions of ash and steam and periodic formation of short-lived lava domes continued throughout the decade. Analysis of the volcano's past behavior indicates that this kind of eruptive activity may continue for years or decades, but another catastrophic eruption like that of May 18, 1980, is unlikely to occur soon. 
On 18 May 1982, the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) formally dedicated the David A. Johnston Cascades Volcano Observatory (CVO) in Vancouver, Washington, in memory of the Survey volcanologist killed two years earlier. This facility--a sister observatory to the Hawaiian Volcano Observatory-- facilitates the increased monitoring and research on not only Mount St. Helens but also the other volcanoes of the Cascade Range of the Pacific Northwest. More recently, in cooperation with the State of Alaska, the USGS established the Alaska Volcano Observatory in March 1988. The work being done at these volcano observatories provides important comparisons and contrasts between the behavior of the generally non-explosive Hawaiian shield volcanoes and that of the generally explosive composite volcanoes of the Cascade and Alaskan Peninsula-Aleutian chains. 



Volcanoes and People.


Volcanoes both harass and help mankind. As dramatically demonstrated by the catastrophic eruption of Mount St. Helens on May 1980 and of Pinatubo in June 1991, volcanoes can wreak havoc and devastation in the short term. The types of volcanic and associated hazards are not described in this booklet but treated in several of the publications listed in Suggested Reading. However, it should be emphasized that the short-term hazards posed by volcanoes are balanced by benefits of volcanism and related processes over geologic time. Volcanic materials ultimately break down to form some of the most fertile soils on Earth, cultivation of which fostered and sustained civilizations. People use volcanic products as construction materials, as abrasive and cleaning agents, and as raw materials for many chemical and industrial uses. The internal heat associated with some young volcanic systems has been harnessed to produce geothermal energy. For example, the electrical energy generated from The Geysers geothermal field in northern California can meet the present power consumption of the city of San Francisco. 
The challenge to scientists involved with volcano research is to mitigate the short-term adverse impacts of eruptions, so that society may continue to enjoy the long-term benefits of volcanism. They must continue to improve the capability for predicting eruptions and to provide decision makers and the general public with the best possible information on high-risk volcanoes for sound decisions on land-use planning and public safety. Geoscientists still do not fully understand how volcanoes really work, but considerable advances have been made in recent decades. An improved understanding of volcanic phenomena provides important clues to the Earth's past, present, and possibly its future. 



Suggested Reading.


Decker, Robert, and Decker, Barbara, 1989, Volcanoes: W.H. Freeman and Company, New York, 285 p. (Revised edition). 
Editors, 1982, Volcano:- in the series Planet Earth, Alexandria, Virginia, Time-Life Books, 176 p. 
Harris, S.L., 1988, Fire mountains of the West: The Cascade and Mono Lake Volcanoes: Missoula, Montana, Mountain Press Publishing Company, 379 p. 
Heliker, Christina, 1990, Volcanic and seismic hazards on the Island of Hawaii: Reston, Virginia, U.S. Geological Survey, 48 p. 
Macdonald, G.A., 1972, Volcanoes: Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey, Prentice-Hall, Inc., 510 p. 
Simkin, Tom, Tilling, R.l., Taggart, J.N., Jones, W.J., and Spall, Henry, compilers, 1989, This dynamic planet: World Map of volcanoes, earthquakes, and plate tectonics: U.S. Geological Survey, Reston, Virginia, prepared in cooperation with the Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C. (scale 1 :30,000,000 at equator). 
Tilling, R.l., Heliker, Christina, and Wright, T.L., 1989, Eruptions of Hawaiian volcanoes: Past, present, and future: Reston, Virginia, U.S. Geological Survey, 54 p. 
Tilling, R.l., Topinka, Lyn, and Swanson, D.A., 1990, Eruptions of Mount St. Helens: Past, present, and future: Reston, Virginia, U.S. Geological Survey, 56 
p. (Revised edition). 
Tilling, R.l., 1991, Monitoring active volcanoes: Reston, Virginia, U.S. Geological Survey, 13 p. (Revised edition). 
Wood, C.A., and Kienle, Jurgen, 1990, Volcanoes of North America: United States and Canada: New York, Cambridge University Press, 354 p.

<#USGS2>
*
Volcanoes of the United States
by Steven R. Brantley
 
Introduction.
Few natural forces are as spectacular and threatening, or have played such a dominant role in shaping the face of the Earth, as erupting volcanoes. Volcanism has built some of the world's greatest mountain ranges, covered vast regions with lava (molten rock at the Earth's surface), and triggered explosive eruptions whose size and power are nearly impossible for us to imagine today. Fortunately, such calamitous eruptions occur infrequently. Of the 50 or so volcanoes that erupt every year, however, a few severely disrupt human activities. Between 1980 and 1990, volcanic activity killed at least 26,000 people and forced nearly 450,000 to flee from their homes.Though few people in the United States may actually experience an erupting volcano, the evidence for earlier volcanism is preserved in many rocks of North America. Features seen in volcanic rocks only hours old are also present in ancient volcanic rocks, both at the surface and buried beneath younger deposits. A thick ash deposit sandwiched between layers of sandstone in Nebraska, the massive granite peaks of the Sierra Nevada mountain range, and a variety of volcanic layers found in eastern Maine are but a few of the striking clues of past volcanism. With this perspective, an erupting volcano is not only an exciting and awesome spectacle in its own right but a window into a natural process that has happened over and over again throughout Earth's history.The Earth's crust, on which we live and depend, is in large part the product of millions of once-active volcanoes and tremendous volumes of magma (molten rock below ground) that did not erupt but instead cooled below the surface. Such persistent and widespread volcanism has resulted in many valuable natural resources throughout the world. For example, volcanic ash blown over thousands of square kilometers of land increases soil fertility for forests and agriculture by adding nutrients and acting as a mulch. Groundwater heated by large, still-hot magma bodies can be tapped for geothermal energy. And over many thousands of years, heated groundwater has concentrated valuable minerals, including copper, tin, gold, and silver, into deposits that are mined throughout the world.
The United States ranks third, behind Indonesia and Japan, in the number of historically active volcanoes (that is, those for which we have written accounts of eruptions). In addition, about 10 percent of the more than 1,500 volcanoes that have erupted in the past 10,000 years are located in the United States. Most of these volcanoes are found in the Aleutian Islands, the Alaska Peninsula, the Hawaiian Islands, and the Cascade Range of the Pacific Northwest; the remainder are widely distributed in the western part of the Nation. A few U.S. volcanoes have produced some of the largest and most dangerous types of eruptions in this century, while several others have threatened to erupt.Scientists at the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) engage in a variety of research activities in order to reduce the loss of life and property that can result from volcanic eruptions and to minimize the social and economic turmoil that can result when volcanoes threaten to erupt. These activities include studies of the physical processes before, during, and after a volcanic eruption, assessments of volcano hazards, and public outreach to translate scientific information about volcanoes into terms that are meaningful to the public and public officials.Monitoring volcanoes for signs of activity, another vital component, is carried out by USGS earth scientists at three volcano observatories, which were established to study active volcanoes in Hawaii (1912), the Cascades (1980), and Alaska (1988). These researchers record earthquakes, survey the surfaces of volcanoes, map volcanic rock deposits, and analyze the chemistry of volcanic gas and fresh lava to detect warning signs of impending activity and determine the most likely type of activity that will affect areas around a volcano. During the past 10 years, several warnings of eruptions were issued by the USGS and monitoring of recently active volcanoes in the United States was expanded. Predicting the time and size of volcanic eruptions, however, remains a difficult challenge for scientists.
Volcanoes and the Theory of Plate Tectonics.
Volcanoes are not randomly distributed over the Earth's surface. Most are concentrated on the edges of continents, along island chains, or beneath the sea forming long mountain ranges. More than half of the world's active volcanoes above sea level encircle the Pacific Ocean to form the circum-Pacific "Ring of Fire." In the past 25 years, scientists have developed a theory--called plate tectonics--that explains the locations of volcanoes and their relationship to other large-scale geologic features.
According to this theory, the Earth's surface is made up of a patchwork of about a dozen large plates that move relative to one another at speeds from less than one centimeter to about ten centimeters per year (about the speed at which fingernails grow). These rigid plates, whose average thickness is about 80 kilometers, are spreading apart, sliding past each other, or colliding with each other in slow motion on top of the Earth's hot, pliable interior. Volcanoes tend to form where plates collide or spread apart, but they can also grow in the middle of a plate, as for example the Hawaiian volcanoes. 
Recent Eruptions from U.S. Volcanoes.
Hawaiian volcanoes.
Few places on Earth allow closer or more dramatic views of volcanic activity than Mauna Loa and Kilauea volcanoes on the island of Hawaii. Their frequent but usually nonexplosive eruptions make them ideal for scientific study. Kilauea's eruptions are so intensely monitored that scientists have assembled a detailed picture of the volcano's magma reservoir "plumbing" system and how it behaves before and during eruptions. Studies of these volcanoes and the surrounding ocean floor continue to improve our understanding of the geologic history of the Hawaiian Island chain and the ability of scientists to determine volcanic hazards that threaten island residents.
Eruptions of Hawaiian volcanoes are typically non-explosive because of the composition of the magma. Almost all of the magma erupted from Hawaii's volcanoes forms dark gray to black volcanic rock (called basalt), generally in the form of lava flows and, less commonly, as fragmented lava such as volcanic bombs, cinders, pumice, and ash. Basalt magma is more fluid than the other types of magma (andesite, dacite, and rhyolite). Consequently, expanding volcanic gases can escape from basalt relatively easily and can propel lava high into the air, forming brilliant fountains sometimes called "curtains of fire."
Lava, whether erupted in high fountains or quietly pouring out, collects to form flows that spread across the ground in thin broad sheets or in narrow streams. The fluid nature of basalt magma allows it to travel great distances from the vent (the place where lava breaks ground) and tends to build volcanoes in the shape of an inverted warrior shield, with slopes less than about 10 degrees. Volcanoes with this kind of profile are called shield volcanoes.
Hawaiian volcanoes erupt at their summit calderas and from their flanks along linear rift zones that extend from the calderas. Calderas are large steep-walled depressions that form when a volcano's summit region collapses, usually after a large eruption empties or partly empties a reservoir of magma beneath the volcano. Rift zones are areas of weakness within a volcano that extend from the surface to depths of several kilometers. Magma that erupts from the flank of a volcano must first flow underground through one of the volcano's rift zones, sometimes traveling more than 30 kilometers from the summit magma reservoir before breaking the surface.
Mauna Loa. Rising more than 9,000 meters from the seafloor, Mauna Loa is one of the world's largest active volcanoes; from its base below sea level to its summit, Mauna Loa is taller than Mount Everest. It has erupted 15 times since 1900, with eruptions lasting from less than 1 day to as many as 145 days. The most recent eruption began before dawn on March 25, 1984. Brilliant lava fountains lit the night-time sky as fissures opened across the floor of the caldera. Within hours, the summit activity stopped and lava began erupting from a series of vents along the northeast rift zone. When the eruption stopped 3 weeks later, lava flows were only 6.5 kilometers from buildings in the city of Hilo. Mauna Loa erupts less frequently than Kilauea, but it produces a much greater volume of lava over a shorter period of time.
Kilauea Volcano. Kilauea's longest rift-zone eruption in historical time began on January 3, 1983. A row of lava fountains broke out from its east rift zone about 17 kilometers from the summit caldera; within a few months, the activity settled down to a single vent. Powerful fountaining episodes hurled molten rock 450 meters into the air and built a cone of lava fragments that quickly became the tallest landmark on the rift zone.
The eruption changed style abruptly in July 1986 when lava broke out through a new vent. Instead of regular episodes of high lava fountaining, lava spilled continuously onto Kilauea's surface. The steady outpouring of lava formed a lake of molten rock that became perched atop a small shield volcano. By June 1991, the shield was about 60 meters tall and 1,600 meters in diameter, and lava from the eruption had covered 75 square kilometers of forest and grassland, added 120 hectares of new land to the island, and destroyed 179 homes.
Although most of Kilauea's historical rift eruptions were much briefer, prolonged eruptive activity in the east rift zone from 1969 to 1974 formed a similar shield, Mauna Ulu (Hawaiian for "Growing Mountain"), and an extensive lava field on the volcano's south flank. The geologic record shows that such large-volume eruptions from the rift zones and the summit area, covering large parts of Kilauea's surface, have occurred many times in the recent past. In fact, about 90 percent of Kilauea's surface is covered with lava flows that are less than 1,100 years old.
Most eruptions at Kilauea can be viewed at close range, but a few historical eruptions were dangerously explosive. Fast-moving mixtures of ash and gas, called pyroclastic surges, raced across the summit area and into the southwest rift zone during an eruption in 1790. Footprints preserved in a layer of ash 30 kilometers southwest of the summit probably include those of a party of Hawaiian warriors and their families who were crossing the volcano when the eruption struck. An estimated 80 of the 250 people were killed by suffocating clouds associated with the pyroclastic surges. A smaller explosive eruption in 1924 from Halemaumau Crater in Kilauea summit caldera, which killed a photographer who was too close, hurled rocks weighing as much as 8 tons as far as 1 kilometer.
Cascade volcanoes.
Volcanoes of the Cascade Range erupt far less frequently than Kilauea and Mauna Loa, but they are more dangerous because of their violently explosive behavior and their proximity to populated and cultivated areas in Washington, Oregon, and California. The 1980 eruption of Mount St. Helens in southwest Washington dramatically illustrated the type of volcanic activity and destruction these volcanoes can produce. Scientific studies of the eruption of Mount St. Helens and the eruptive histories of other Cascade volcanoes continue to improve public awareness and understanding of these potentially dangerous peaks.In contrast to Kilauea, Cascade volcanoes erupt a variety of magma types that generate a wide range of eruptive behavior and build steepsided cones known as composite volcanoes. In addition to basalt, andesite and dacite magmas are common.
These magmas are so highly viscous, or sticky, that expanding volcanic gases cannot easily escape from them. This causes a tremendous build-up in pressure, often leading to extremely explosive eruptions. During such eruptions, magma is shattered into tiny fragments (chiefly ash and pumice) and ejected thousands of meters into the atmosphere or even the stratosphere. Under the force of gravity, sometimes these fragments sweep down a volcano's flanks at speeds of more than 100 kilometers per hour, mixing with air and volcanic gases to form pyroclastic flows. Rock fragments can also mix with water in river valleys to form lahars (volcanic debris flows and mudflows) that destroy everything in their paths.Andesite and dacite magmas also erupt to form lava flows. Because these lavas are more viscous ("stickier") than basalt, they tend to form thicker flows that travel shorter distances from the vent; consequently, andesite and dacite lavas typically build tall cones with steep slopes of more than 20 degrees.
Mount Baker, Washington. Eyewitness reports of small ashy plumes and active steam vents on Mount Baker dating as far back as the mid-1800's were clear evidence that the ice-covered volcano had one of the most active geothermal systems among Cascade volcanoes. When new fumaroles and unusually dark vapor plumes appeared abruptly in March 1975, however, people in the Northwest became concerned about an impending eruption and possible avalanches and lahars from Sherman Crater, a vent just south of Mount Baker's summit. Despite a tenfold increase in the release of heat by the volcano during the next 12 months, which resulted in extensive changes to the ice cover in Sherman Crater and produced minor releases of ash, no eruption occurred. The thermal activity was not accompanied by earthquakes, which generally precede most eruptions, and since 1976, the volcano has not showed additional signs of activity.
The increased thermal activity between 1975 and 1976 prompted public officials and Puget Power to temporarily close public access to the popular Baker Lake recreation area and to lower the reservoir's water level by 10 meters. Significant avalanches of debris from the Sherman Crater area could have swept directly into the reservoir, triggering a disastrous wave that would have caused loss of life and damage to the reservoir.
Mount Rainier, Washington. Mount Rainier has not produced a significant eruption in the past 500 years, but scientists consider it to be one of the most hazardous volcanoes in the Cascades. Mount Rainier has 26 glaciers containing more than five times as much snow and ice as all the other Cascade volcanoes combined. If only a small part of this ice were melted by volcanic activity, it would yield enough water to trigger enormous lahars.
Mount Rainier's potential for generating destructive mudflows is enhanced by its great height above surrounding valleys and its "soft" interior. The volcano stands about 3,000 meters above river valleys leading from its base. Volcanic heat and ground water have turned some of the volcano's originally hard lava into soft clay minerals, thereby weakening its internal structure. These conditions make Mount Rainier extremely susceptible to large landslides. Several have occurred in the past few thousand years, one as recently as about 600 years ago. These landslides, apparently containing great volumes of water, quickly turned into lahars as they rushed down river valleys.
Mount St. Helens, Washington. The catastrophic eruption on May 18, 1980, was preceded by 2 months of intense activity that included more than 10,000 earthquakes, hundreds of small phreatic (steam-blast) explosions, and the outward growth of the volcano's entire north flank by more than 80 meters. A magnitude 5.1 earthquake struck beneath the volcano at 08:32 on May 18, setting in motion the devastating eruption.
Within seconds of the earthquake, the volcano's bulging north flank slid away in the largest landslide in recorded history, triggering a destructive, lethal lateral blast of hot gas, steam, and rock debris that swept across the landscape as fast as 1,100 kilometers per hour. Temperatures within the blast reached as high as 300 degrees Celsius. Snow and ice on the volcano melted, forming torrents of water and rock debris that swept down river valleys leading from the volcano. Within minutes, a massive plume of ash thrust 19 kilometers into the sky, where the prevailing wind carried about 490 tons of ash across 57,000 square kilometers of the Western United States.
The well-documented landslide at Mount St. Helens has helped geologists to recognize more than 200 similar deposits at other volcanoes in the world, including several other Cascade peaks. Geologists now realize that large landslides from volcanoes are far more common than previously thought--seventeen such volcanic landslides have occurred worldwide in the past 400 years. Consequently, when scientists evaluate the types of volcanic activity that may endanger people, giant landslides are now included, in addition to other types of volcanic activity such as lava flows, pyroclastic flows, lahars, and falling ash.
Following the 1980 explosive eruption, more than a dozen extrusions of thick, pasty lava built a mound-shaped lava dome in the new crater. The dome is about 1,100 meters in diameter and 250 meters tall.
Lassen Peak, California. Long before the recent activity of Mount St. Helens, a series of spectacular eruptions from Lassen Peak between 1914 and 1917 demonstrated the explosive potential of Cascade volcanoes. Small phreatic explosions began on May 30, 1914, and were followed during the next 12 months by more than 150 explosions that sent clouds of ash as high as 3 kilometers above the peak. The activity changed character in May 1915, when a lava flow was observed in the summit crater. A deep red glow from the hot lava was visible at night 34 kilometers away. On May 19, an avalanche of hot rocks from the lava spilled onto snow and triggered a lahar that extended more than 15 kilometers from the volcano.
The most destructive explosion occurred on May 21, when a pyroclastic flow devastated forests as far as 6.5 kilometers northeast of the summit and lahars swept down several valleys radiating from the volcano. An enormous ash plume rose more than 9 kilometers above the peak, and the prevailing winds scattered the ash across Nevada as far as 500 kilometers to the east. Lassen Peak continued to produce smaller eruptions until about the middle of 1917.
Alaskan volcanoes.
The Alaska Peninsula and the Aleutian Islands have about 80 major volcanic centers that consist of one or more volcanoes. Recent violent eruptions have demonstrated that volcanic hazards do exist in some areas of Alaska, even though it is sparsely populated. Alaskan volcanoes have produced one or two eruptions per year since 1900. At least 20 catastrophic caldera-forming eruptions have occurred in the past 10,000 years; the awesome eruption of 1912 at Novarupta in the Katmai National Monument is the most recent. Scientists are particularly concerned about the volcanoes whose eruptions can affect the Cook Inlet region, where 60 percent of Alaska's population lives.
Redoubt Volcano. Redoubt Volcano erupted for the fourth time this century on December 14, 1989. Following several days of strong explosive activity, a series of lava domes grew in Redoubt's summit crater during the next four months. Most of the domes were destroyed by explosions or collapsed down the volcano's north flank. Some of these events triggered small pyroclastic flows that melted snow and ice on the volcano to form lahars in Drift River Valley, which empties into Cook Inlet 35 kilometers away.
Ash produced by the eruptions severely affected air traffic enroute to Anchorage, Alaska's largest city and a major hub of domestic and international commercial air traffic. Many domestic carriers suspended service to Alaska following major explosive events, and several international carriers temporarily rerouted flights around Alaska. On December 15, a jetliner enroute to Japan encountered an ash cloud while descending into Anchorage. The plane quickly lost power in all four engines and lost 4,000 meters in altitude before the pilots were able to restart the engines. The aircraft landed safely in Anchorage, but it sustained more than $80 million in damage.
Lahars generated during the eruption threatened an oil-storage facility located on the banks of Drift River. Oil is pumped from more than a dozen wells in Cook Inlet to the facility and then loaded onto tankers, which dock just offshore. A lahar on January 2 flooded part of the facility with nearly a meter of water, forcing its shutdown until workers could restore power. This and subsequent lahars prompted the Cook Inlet Pipeline Company to temporarily halt oil production from some oil wells and reduce the amount of oil stored at the facility between tanker loadings.
Augustine Volcano. One of the most active volcanoes in Cook Inlet is Augustine, whose symmetrical cone rises 1,254 meters above the sea. Since Captain James Cook discovered and named it in 1778, Augustine has erupted in 1812, 1883, 1935, 1963-64, 1976, and 1986. Curiously, the quiet intervals between these eruptions apparently have shortened from 70 to 10 years.
Augustine's 1986 eruption was similar to the pattern of events observed in 1976. After eight months of earthquake activity beneath the volcano, a violent explosion began on March 26. Billowing ash plumes rose more than 10 kilometers above the vent, pyroclastic flows sped down the volcano's flanks into the sea, and ash spread throughout Cook Inlet. A second stage began April 23, when lava began erupting near the volcano's summit and added about 25 meters to the top of the existing lava dome. Small pyroclastic flows accompanied growth of the dome.Scientists were worried that this eruption might trigger a giant landslide from Augustine's steep upper cone, which could enter the sea to create a tsunami (powerful seismic sea wave). At least 12 landslides are known to have occurred at Augustine. The most recent slide took place at the onset of the 1883 eruption when a part of the volcano's summit collapsed into the sea. Within one hour, a tsunami as high as 9 meters crashed ashore on the coast of the Kenai Peninsula 80 kilometers away. No one was killed and property damage was only minor because the tsunami hit at low tide. Subsequent eruptions have rebuilt a steep cone of overlapping lava domes similar to the cone that existed just before the 1883 landslide.
Novarupta, Katmai National Monument. The largest eruption in the world this century occurred in 1912 at Novarupta on the Alaska Peninsula. An estimated 15 cubic kilometers of magma was explosively erupted during 60 hours beginning on June 6-- about 30 times the volume erupted by Mount St. Helens in 1980! The expulsion of such a large volume of magma excavated a funnel-shaped vent 2 kilometers wide and triggered the collapse of Mount Katmai volcano 10 kilometers away to form a summit caldera 600 meters deep and about 3 kilometers across. Extrusion of the lava dome, called Novarupta, near the center of the 1912 vent marked the end of the eruption.
Little was known about the spectacular effects of this great eruption until 1916, when a scientific expedition sponsored by the National Geographic Society visited the area. To their amazement, they found a broad valley northwest of Novarupta marked by a flat plain of loose, "sandy" ash material from which thousands of jets of steam were hissing. The eruption had produced pyroclastic flows that swept about 21 kilometers down the upper Ukak River valley. The thickness of the resulting pumice and ash deposits in the upper valley is not known but may be as great as 200 meters. In 1916, the deposits were still hot enough to boil water and form countless steaming fumaroles; hence the expedition named this part of the Ukak River the "Valley of Ten Thousand Smokes."
Trident Volcano. Eruptions of andesitic lava flows between 1953 and 1960 built a new cone on Trident's southwest flank, adding yet another to the volcano's older complex of three overlapping cones (hence the name Trident). A huge cloud of rising ash was seen on February 15, 1953, in the direction of Katmai National Monument; 3 days later clear weather permitted U.S. Navy pilots to spot a blocky lava flow emerging from Trident's southwest flank. Slow extrusion of lava during the next 4 months built an irregularly shaped lava dome about 1.5 kilometers long and 600 meters tall. Trident continued to erupt intermittently through 1960, generating three lava flows as long as 4.5 kilometers from the same vent and numerous ash-producing explosive eruptions.
Mount Veniaminof. Mount Veniaminof is a massive composite volcano with a summit caldera about 8 kilometers in diameter. Since its formation about 3,700 years ago, the caldera has filled with ice to a depth of at least 60 meters. Between June 1983 and January 1984, a series of small explosions, lava fountains, and lava flows erupted from a small cinder cone within the caldera. The explosions hurled molten lava from the cinder cone, and lava flows melted a pit about 1.5 kilometers in diameter in the ice near the base of the volcano. Water from the melting ice formed a temporary lake.
Mount Spurr. The summit cone of Mount Spurr consists of a large lava dome built in the center of a horseshoe-shaped crater formed earlier by a large landslide. At the southern edge of this ancient crater is a younger, more active cone known as Crater Peak. Scientists have determined that Crater Peak is the source for at least 35 ash layers found in the Cook Inlet area, all of which were erupted in the past 6,000 years. Until recently, a warm turquoise-colored lake partially filled its crater.
A series of explosive eruptions from Crater Peak on June 27, 1992, generated ash plumes as high as about 14 kilometers, small pyroclastic flows that swept down the south and east sides of the cone, and small lahars. The reawakening of Crater Peak followed nearly a year of increased earthquake activity, which escalated further on June 26, less than 1 day before its first eruption. Not all of the explosive episodes were preceded by a change in seismicity beneath the volcano, a condition that required scientists to maintain a 24-hour watch for extended periods of time in order to issue sudden reports and warnings of eruptive activity. The west side of Cook Inlet received a light to moderate ashfall during the largest explosive episode on August 18; Anchorage was blanketed with about 3 millimeters of ash, causing the Anchorage International Airport to close for a few hours. During an eruption at night on September 17, a spectacular display of lightning and incandescent ballistics and pyroclastic flows were witnessed by hunters who camped about 18 kilometers to the southeast; a faint glow above Crater Peak was also visible from as far away as Anchorage.
Restless calderas.
The largest and most explosive volcanic eruptions eject tens to hundreds of cubic kilometers of magma onto the Earth's surface. When such a large volume of magma is removed from beneath a volcano, the ground subsides or collapses into the emptied space, to form a huge depression called a caldera. Some calderas are more than 25 kilometers in diameter and several kilometers deep.
Calderas are among the most spectacular and active volcanic features on Earth. Earthquakes, ground cracks, uplift or subsidence of the ground, and thermal activity such as hot springs, geysers, and boiling mud pots are common at many calderas. Such activity is caused by complex interactions among magma stored beneath a caldera, ground water, and the regional buildup of stress in the large plates of the Earth's crust. Significant changes in the level of activity at some calderas are common; these new activity levels can be intermittent, lasting for months to years, or persistent over decades to centuries. Although most caldera unrest does not lead to an eruption, the possibility of violent explosive eruptions warrants detailed scientific study and monitoring of some active calderas.
Recently, scientists have recognized volcanic unrest at two calderas in the United States, Long Valley Caldera in eastern California and Yellowstone Caldera in Yellowstone National Park, Wyoming. Whether unrest at these calderas simply punctuates long periods of quiet or is the early warning sign of future eruptions is an important but still unanswered question.
Long Valley Caldera, California. Long Valley Caldera lies on the eastern front of the Sierra Nevada, about 300 kilometers east of San Francisco. A huge explosive eruption about 700,000 years ago formed the caldera and produced pyroclastic flows that traveled 65 kilometers from the vent and covered an area of about 1,500 square kilometers. Ash from the caldera-forming eruption fell as far east as Nebraska. Within the past 40,000 years, eruptions have been restricted to a linear zone of vents, including the Mono-Inyo Craters Volcanic Chain, that extends about 50 kilometers north from the northwest part of the caldera.
This volcanic chain consists of many vents that have erupted in the past several thousand years. Eruptions from vents as recently as 550 years ago produced lava flows, pyroclastic flows, and ash, all of rhyolitic composition. Geologic mapping shows that some eruptions were preceded by ground cracking, suggesting that the ground was pulled apart or stretched as magma neared the surface.
Three moderate earthquakes south of the caldera and one beneath the caldera on May 25-26, 1980, marked the beginning of unrest that continues into the 1990's. Swarms of earthquakes beneath the caldera, changes in several hot springs, and the formation of new springs have occurred since 1980. Precise surveys have also shown that the central part of the caldera has risen by more than 50 centimeters since 1975. This unrest is probably related to the stretching (east-west extension) of the Earth's crust that is known to be occurring in the region around the caldera, and it probably also involves the rise of magma beneath the caldera. Scientists do not know if this unrest will lead to volcanic activity, but the geologically recent eruptions along the Mono-Inyo Craters Volcanic Chain suggest that future eruptions are possible.
Yellowstone Caldera, Yellowstone National Park, Wyoming. Yellowstone Caldera is one of the largest and most active calderas in the world. The spectacular geysers, boiling hot springs, and mud pots that have made Yellowstone famous--and even the strikingly beautiful Grand Canyon of Yellowstone through which the Yellowstone River plunges--owe their existence to the tremendous volcanic forces that have affected the region during the past 2 million years. Cataclysmic eruptions 2.0, 1.3, and 0.6 million years ago ejected huge volumes of rhyolite magma; each eruption formed a caldera and extensive layers of thick pyroclastic-flow deposits. The youngest caldera is an elliptical depression, nearly 80 kilometers long and 50 kilometers wide, that occupies much of Yellowstone National Park. The caldera is buried by several extensive rhyolite lava flows erupted between 75,000 and 150,000 years ago.
The Earth's crust beneath Yellowstone National Park is still restless. Precise surveys have detected an area in the center of the caldera that rose by as much as 86 centimeters between 1923 and 1984 and then subsided slightly between 1985 and 1989. Scientists do not know the cause of these ups and downs but hypothesize that they are related to the addition or withdrawal of magma beneath the caldera, or to the changing pressure of the hot ground water system above Yellowstone's large magma reservoir. Also, Yellowstone National Park and the area immediately west of the Park are historically among the most seismically active areas in the Rocky Mountains. Small-magnitude earthquakes are common beneath the entire caldera, but most are located along the Hebgen Lake fault zone that extends into the northwest part of the caldera. A magnitude 7.5 earthquake occurred along this zone in 1959.
Active Volcanoes: Windows into the Past.
Molten rock has erupted onto the surface of the Earth throughout its 4.5-billion-year history. Although many of these ancient rocks were removed by erosion, volcanic deposits can be found beneath younger rocks in many parts of the United States. To a geologist, such long-lasting volcanic rocks look like those formed by today's active volcanoes. Many ancient volcanic rocks, however, change somewhat with time, as they become firmly consolidated, buried by younger deposits, and sometimes folded and faulted by the continuous shifting of the Earth's crust. Even minerals of volcanic rocks may change, if after burial they encounter high pressures and temperatures.
Most active volcanoes are built on older volcanic deposits erupted from ancient volcanoes, and visitors to the present-day volcanoes walk or drive across these products of past volcanism. For example, anyone driving across the Cascade Range, sunbathing at Waikiki, or fishing on the Alaska Peninsula is there because old volcanic rocks form the landscape.
One step further back in time from today's active volcanoes are people who picnic in the White Mountains of New Hampshire, enjoy the autumn colors in the Blue Ridge of Shenandoah National Park, and hike in the rugged Big Bend National Park of Texas. Many of the rocks in these areas were formed by eruptions or by intrusion of magma into the Earth's crust many millions of years ago. Because volcanic activity has been so important in shaping the Earth, watching active volcanoes today provides a window through which we can glimpse and reconstruct the early volcanic history of our planet.
As we increase our knowledge about volcanic processes, by studying volcanoes erupting today as well as those that have lain dormant for hundreds to thousands of years, we increase our ability to predict when and how volcanoes will erupt. Accurate predictions, presented in terms that are meaningful to public officials, will minimize the number of lives lost and the social and economic upheaval that an eruption can cause.


Further Reading
Decker, Robert, and Decker, Barbara, 1989, Volcanoes: San Francisco, Freeman, 285 p. (An information-packed introduction to the study of volcanoes written in an easy-to-read style.)
Editors, 1982, Volcano: in the series Planet Earth, Alexandria, Virginia, Time-Life Books,176 p. (A well illustrated and readable general survey of volcanoes and their activity.)
McClelland, Lindsay, Simkin, Tom, Summers, Marjorie, Nielsen, Elizabeth, and Stein, T.C., editors, 1989, Global Volcanism 1975-1985: Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey, Prentice-Hall, 656 p. (A full account of volcanism on Earth based on eyewitness accounts from geologists and other scientists, reporters, travelers, and other keen observers.)
Simkin, Tom, Seibert, Lee, McClelland, Lindsay, Bridge, David, Newhall, Christopher, and Latter, J.H., 1981, Volcanoes of the World: Stroudsburg, Pa., Hutchinson Ross, 233 p. (A comprehensive regional directory of worldwide volcanic activity during the past 10,000 years; activity presented in table format.)
Tilling, R.l., 1982, Volcanoes: Reston, Virginia, U.S. Geological Survey general-interest publication, 46 p. (A general introduction for the nonspecialist to the study of volcanoes, with focus on the nature, types, workings, products, and hazards of volcanoes.)
Tilling, R.l., 1984, Eruptions of Mount St. Helens: Past, present, and future: Reston, Virginia, U.S. Geological Survey general-interest publication, 46 p. (A nontechnical summary, illustrated by many color photographs and diagrams, of the abundant scientific data available for the volcano, with emphasis on the catastrophic eruption on May 18, 1980, which caused the worst volcanic disaster in U.S. history.)
Tilling, R.l., 1987, Eruptions of Hawaiian volcanoes: Past, present, and future: Reston, Virginia, U.S. Geological Survey general-interest publication, 54 p. (A nontechnical summary, illustrated by color photographs and drawings, of the eruption history, style, and products of two of Hawaii's active volcanoes, Kilauea and Mauna Loa.)
Wood, C.A., and Kienle, Jurgen, editors, 1990, Volcanoes of North America--United States and Canada: Cambridge University Press, 354 p. (A rich compilation of volcanoes and volcanic fields in North America that were formed in the past 5 million years; includes more than 250 entries prepared by leading experts in volcanology.)

<#USGS3>
*
Volcanic and Seismic Hazards on the Island of Hawaii: 

PREFACE.

The eruptions of volcanoes often have direct, dramatic effects on the lives of people and on their property. People who live on or near active volcanoes can benefit greatly from clear, scientific information about the volcanic and seismic hazards of the area. This booklet provides such information for the residents of Hawaii so they may effectively deal with the special geologic hazards of the island. 
Identifying and evaluating possible geologic hazards is one of the principal roles of the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) and its Hawaiian Volcano Observatory. When USGS scientists recognize a potential hazard, such as an impending eruption, they notify the appropriate government officials, who in turn are responsible for advising the public to evacuate certain areas or to take other actions to insure their safety. 
This booklet was prepared in cooperation with the Hawaii County Civil Defense Agency. 

INTRODUCTION.

The Hawaiian Islands are the tops of volcanoes that rise as much as 30,000 feet above the sea floor. (Map used by permission of Dynamic Graphics, Berkeley, California.) 
The Hawaiian Islands are at the southeastern end of a chain of volcanoes that began to form over 70 million years ago. Each island is made up of one or more volcanoes that first erupted at the bottom of the sea and emerged above the ocean's surface after countless eruptions over hundreds of thousands of years. Most of the volcanic activity in historical time has occurred on the Island of Hawaii, the youngest island of the chain. Hawaii is composed of five volcanoes, at least two of which -- Kilauea and Mauna Loa -- are expected to erupt frequently throughout the foreseeable future. 
The Island of Hawaii owes its unique landscape to its volcanic origin. From the barren, red cinder cones on the summit of Mauna Kea to the fern-lined craters and black sand beaches of Puna, volcanic activity has combined with the subtropical climate to create the scenery that draws visitors from all over the world. Hawaii's residents not only enjoy the benefits of past volcanic activity, but also have the opportunity to witness the frequent eruptions of the active volcanoes as the island continues to grow. 
Information in this booklet on hazards on the Island of Hawaii will help residents to make decisions about where to buy property, build a house, or start a business. A family planning to build a home may decide that the advantages of an area, such as the beauty of a beach lot, outweigh the risks, even in a high hazard zone. But such decisions can be made intelligently only if the hazards are understood beforehand. 
Public officials who must make decisions regarding land-use planning will also find the information in this publication useful. The Hawaii County government receives numerous proposals for development projects ranging from resort complexes to space launch facilities. Obviously, the degree of volcanic and seismic hazard at a given site should be a major factor in evaluating these projects. 


historically active volcanoes are indicated by the stippled gray pattern. 
Dashed lines indicate the boundaries of districts on the island. 

VOLCANIC HAZARDS. 

Hawaiian volcanoes can erupt either at their summits or on their flanks. Young Hawaiian volcanoes, such as Kilauea and Mauna Loa, have summit calderas. A caldera is a crater several miles in diameter that forms as the result of collapse when magma drains from beneath the summit. (Magma is the term used for molten rock that is still beneath the earth's surface; it is called lava when it reaches the surface.) Summit eruptions of Kilauea and Mauna Loa occur within or near their calderas. Flank eruptions usually take place along rift zones, which are highly fractured zones of weakness within the volcano. Rift zones typically extend from the summit of a volcano toward the coastline and may continue for many miles under the sea. 
             
The Pu'u 'O'o vent began erupting in 1983 on Kilauea's east rift zone, 12 miles from the volcano's summit. (Photograph provided by the National Park Service) 

Lava flows from the Kupaianaha vent on Kilauea's east rift zone bury a street intersection in Kalapana Gardens subdivision in December 1986. 


Lava flows are the most common of the direct hazards created by Hawaiian eruptions and pose the greatest threat to property. Other hazards include airborne particles of ash, cinder, and fragile strands of volcanic glass called Pele's hair, and corrosive volcanic gases. Explosive eruptions occur much less often than non-explosive eruptions at Hawaiian volcanoes but have been witnessed in historic time. The greatest danger associated with explosive eruptions is their potential to produce pyroclastic surges. These surges are highly destructive, turbulent gas clouds that flow rapidly along the ground carrying hot ash and rock fragments. A lesser volcanic hazard is created by ground movement, which may result in large cracks across roads and other property or cause uneven settling of foundations. Generally, only areas near an active or recently active volcanic vent are affected by large-scale ground cracks and settling. 



Lava Flows.
Lava flows are the most common of the direct volcanic hazards in Hawaii. Flows may endanger people's property, livelihood, and peace of mind, but seldom their lives. The fronts of Hawaiian lava flows generally move more slowly than the speed at which people walk, although the lava in the channel behind the front may be flowing much faster. On steep slopes a large flow could travel rapidly enough to endanger persons in its path. During the 1950 eruption of Mauna Loa, a flow front advanced at an average speed of almost 6 mph for over 2 hours. 
             
A lava flow from the Pu'u 'O'o vent advances down a street in the Royal Gardens subdivision in April 1983. 
 
Lava flows from Pu'u 'O'o had already cut a swath through the Royal Gardens subdivision when this photograph was taken in 1983. Many more flows were to follow. The subdivision was developed on a steep slope below Kilaeua's east rift zone. 

The speed of a lava flow is determined not only by the steepness of the terrain, but also by the volume of lava that is erupted, because large flows tend to advance more rapidly than do small flows. The distance that a flow travels ultimately depends both on the eruption rate and on the duration of the eruption. 
The chemical composition of lava will also affect how rapidly a flow travels. Most Hawaiian lavas are classified as basalts, but within this category there are many types. Some basalts are more fluid and will flow at greater speeds than others. The eruption of Hualalai in 1800-1801 produced lava flows that appear to have been more fluid than flows from similar eruptions on Kilauea and Mauna Loa. 

An active lava pond overlies the Kupaianaha vent. Lave enters the lava tube system at the far end of the long neck on the pondThe continuing eruption on Kilauea's east rift zone, which began in 1983, provides a good example of two common, but very different, types of eruptive behavior: rapidly-moving flows produced during brief, high-volume eruptions, and slow-moving flows created by a prolonged low-volume eruption. The Pu'u 'O'o-Kupaianaha eruption on Kilauea's east rift zone, which began in 1983, provides a good example of two common, but very different, types of eruptive behavior: rapidly-moving flows produced during brief, high-volume eruptions, and slow-moving flows created by a prolonged low-volume eruption. The episodic eruptions at the Pu'u 'O'o vent, which was active from June 1983 through June 1986, produced a large volume of lava within a few hours' time. These outbursts were characterized by spectacular lava fountains and lava flows that moved rapidly down the volcano's south flank. The flows entered the Royal Gardens subdivision during 7 episodes and destroyed 16 homes. Each flow was short-lived, however, and stagnated soon after the lava fountains died. None of these flows reached the coastline. 
In July 1986, the site of the eruption shifted to the Kupaianaha vent, 1.8 miles to the northeast of Pu'u 'O'o. Kupaianaha erupted almost continuously for over 5 years but at a much lower rate than Pu'u 'O'o. During the first few months of activity at Kupaianaha, the lava flows did not advance more than a mile beyond the vent. But after months of continuous eruption, a lava tube system formed as channeled lava flows gradually formed roofs, enclosing the rivers of lava within. Lava tubes are significant in terms of hazard, since the tubes insulate the lava and allow it to flow much farther before cooling and stopping. 
A Kalapana house is ignited by a lava flow. By 1991, this community lay buried beneath 50-75 feet of lava. The hazards posed by a prolonged low-volume eruption soon became apparent as lava tubes from Kupaianaha extended toward the Kalapana coast. From November 1986 to October 1991, tube-fed flows repeatedly engulfed residential areas on the coastal plain, destroying 165 houses. Although these flows buried many acres within a single day, there was ample time to evacuate residents. Warnings issued by the Hawaii County Civil Defense allowed people enough time to remove most of their belongings and, in some cases, even to dismantle and move their homes. In 1992, the threat to inhabited areas eased when the eruption shifted to new vents on the southwest flank of the Pu'u 'O'o cone, inside Hawaii Volcanoes National Park. 
The chief threat of lava flows to property owners is that the flows may burn structures and bury land. There are other effects, however, that may be almost as disruptive, as the Kalapana community discovered during the repeated inundations of the area by lava. In addition to destroying homes, the flows covered almost 2 miles of the coastal highway. Some residents were forced to move when the highway closure increased their daily commute by nearly 100 miles. Many more residents of the Kalapana area were faced with financial losses as land values dropped and insurance companies refused to issue new homeowners policies. 
Even houses that are spared by the lava, however, may be rendered uninhabitable when the roads and utility lines leading to them are destroyed. By 1996, lava flows from Kilauea's eruption had covered 8 miles of the coastal highway, isolating the few structures that remained within the area. 



Airborne Lava Fragments.
Most volcanic eruptions produce fragments of lava that are airborne for at least a short time before being deposited on the ground. These fragments are called "tephra," and include ash, cinders, and Pele's hair. In Hawaii, tephra is usually ejected by lava fountains and poses a serious hazard only in the immediate vicinity of an erupting vent. Windborne tephra, however, can be disruptive at greater distances. The combination of high lava fountains and strong winds may result in tephra being carried many miles downwind of the eruption site. During lava fountaining episodes at Pu'u 'O'o from 1984 to 1986, the prevailing trade winds deposited most of the tephra in remote areas of Hawaii Volcanoes National Park, but small particles reached the town of Naalehu 39 miles away. During the same episodes, Kona winds (from the southwest) occasionally carried tephra to Hilo, 22 miles from the vent. 

The high lava fountains of Pu'u 'O'o produced black clouds of tephra, cooled bits of lava that collected downwind of the vent to form deposits of cinders and Pele's hair. 

A close-up view of tephra, including cinders and Pele's hair (lower left). 


The small amount of tephra that fell on inhabited areas was not harmful to most people, but it was a source of irritation to those with respiratory problems and an inconvenience to the many residents with rain-water-catchment systems. 
Following at least three high-fountaining episodes, Hawaii County Civil Defense recommended that people disconnect and clean their rain-water catchment systems to prevent the particles from washing into their water supply. 



Volcanic Gases.

Each episode of high fountaining from Pu'u 'O'o released a tremendous plume of volcanic gas into the atmosphere. 
Volcanic gases are emitted during all types of eruptions. Gases also can be released during repose periods by inactive eruptive vents and by fumaroles, vents that may never have produced any lava. The gas plume rising from an active vent on Kilauea consists of about 80 percent water vapor with lesser amounts of sulfur dioxide, carbon dioxide, and hydrogen. Small quantities (typically less than 1 percent by volume) of carbon monoxide, hydrogen sulfide, and hydrogen fluoride are also present. Extremely small amounts of mercury and other metals have been detected in gases emitted from vents along the east rift zone of Kilauea, but none have been found in concentrations large enough to create a direct health hazard. 
Any hazard posed by volcanic gases is greatest immediately downwind from active vents; the concentration of the gases quickly diminishes as the gases mix with air and are carried by winds away from the source. Brief exposure to gases near vents generally does not harm healthy people, but it can endanger those with heart and respiratory ailments, such as chronic asthma. 
A common gas produced during Hawaiian eruptions that is potentially harmful to human health is sulfur dioxide. Even small concentrations of sulfur dioxide can combine with water to form sulfuric acid, which can attack skin, cloth, metal, and other materials. When a volcanic plume mixes with atmospheric moisture, acid rain results. Acid rain can significantly retard the growth of cultivated or natural plant life downwind of a vent that degasses over a long period of time. The sulfur dioxide emitted from Kilauea's summit during typical non-eruptive periods affects a relatively small area downwind of the summit. Similarly, the gases produced during short-lived eruptions affect only a limited area, although their odor may be detected many miles from the vent. The continuous emission of volcanic fumes during Kilauea's Pu'u 'O'o-Kupaianaha eruption, however, resulted in persistent volcanic haze and acid-rain conditions in the South Kona district on the leeward side of the island. 
       
Broccoli plants damaged by volcanic fumes from Pu'u 'O'o vent, 12 miles away. 
In late 1987, studies conducted on private water-catchment systems in the South Kona area revealed higher than average acidity in several water samples. Drinking the acidic water does not pose a health hazard, but such water can leach lead from the lead roof flashings, lead-headed nails, and solder connections found in many plumbing systems, resulting in unsafe levels of lead in the drinking water. Extensive testing in 1988 determined that many water-catchment systems on the island, particularly those in the districts adjacent to or downwind of the active vent, contained elevated levels of lead. Residents with rain-catchment systems should contact the Hawaii State Department of Health for information on how to avoid lead contamination of their drinking water. 
Volcanic fumes can also damage agricultural crops. During the 1969-74 eruption of Kilauea's Mauna Ulu vent, the South Kona district experienced prolonged periods of eruption-related smog. A study conducted in 1972 by the University of Hawaii's Agricultural Experiment Station at Hilo concluded that the acid rain resulting from the fume was responsible for severe damage to the Kona tomato crop. The Pu'u 'O'o-Kupaianaha eruption of Kilauea caused similar problems for vegetable and flower growers in both the Kona and Puna districts, who reported light-to-moderate crop damage during periods when winds blew the gases over their fields. 



Explosive Eruptions.
The rare explosive eruptions in Hawaii generally are caused by the interaction of magma and ground water. The magnitude of the resulting steam explosion varies from harmless to catastrophic. Small steam-blast explosions occurred during the 1960 Kapoho eruption when the magma beneath the vents, which were near sea level, encountered saltwater trapped in the surrounding rocks. These steam blasts ejected black clouds of pulverized rock fragments but were of little hazard except to scientists working close to the vents. 
       
The 1924 explosive eruption of Kilaeua mainly affected the immediate vivinity of Halemaumau crater. (Photograph courtesy of the Bishop Museum) A much larger steam-blast eruption occurred at the summit of Kilauea in 1924, when ground water apparently flowed into the heated rocks beneath the Halemaumau vent, which had been erupting nearly continuously for over a century. The explosions continued at intervals for 2 weeks, carpeting the area around Halemaumau crater with large rocks and a thin layer of ash. Boulders weighing several tons were thrown as far as 3,000 feet from the crater. The greatest hazard posed by this type of activity is that it may start abruptly and endanger unwary onlookers. The 1924 eruption claimed one fatality--a man who ventured too close to. the vent between explosions to take photographs and was struck by a rock when the activity suddenly resumed. 
The largest explosive eruption on Hawaii within historical time occurred in 1790. This eruption produced pyroclastic surges (turbulent clouds of hot gas and rock fragments) that originated at Kilauea's summit and flowed several miles to the southwest. Pyroclastic surges are extremely dangerous because they move at speeds of 30 to 200 mph, and humans and animals caught in their path are killed by either asphyxiation or heat. A band of Hawaiian warriors traveling from Hilo to the Ka'u district to battle with Chief Kamehameha were overtaken by one of the 1790 pyroclastic surges, and about 80 of them were killed. The 1790 eruption left deposits of rock fragments and ash up to 30 feet thick on the rim of Kilauea's summit caldera. 
The thick deposits of ash exposed at many sites on the island indicate that even larger explosive eruptions occurred in prehistoric times and probably originated from Mauna Kea as well as from Kilauea. Explosive eruptions of any size take place infrequently in Hawaii, but the possibility of one occurring in our lifetime should not be totally discounted. Such eruptions are unlikely to begin without some warning. The most widespread hazard from an explosive eruption would be windborne ash, which could damage structures, machinery, and agricultural crops. 



Ground Cracks and Settling.
Ground cracks and settling are commonly associated with volcanic activity; both generally occur near active or recently active volcanic vents as the result of shallow underground movement of magma. The beginning of an eruption at a new site is preceded by cracking of the ground as magma is forcefully injected into the area. The cracks may be as much as 6 feet wide and over a mile long; typically they form within a period of hours. The Kapoho area on Kilauea's lower east rift zone experienced such ground breakage prior to eruptions in 1924, 1955, and 1960. 
             
Before the 1960 eruption, a large ground crack opened in the village of Kapoho, which was built on Kilaeua's east rift zone. The village was later completely destroyed by the eruption. (Photograph provided by the National Park Service).  Ground cracks associated with eruptive activity on Kilaeua's upper southwest rift zone. 

Ground settling may occur near a vent at the end of an eruption as magma drains away from beneath the vent area. This process produces both small depressions and large collapse features, such as the pit craters and summit calderas of Kilauea and Mauna Loa. In either case, the subsidence may be gradual or abrupt. The hazard presented by ground cracks and settling associated with eruptions is usually limited to areas near the active vent and thus is overshadowed by the hazard posed by lava flows. Man-made structures that escape other damage from an eruption, however, can be damaged or destroyed by cracking, tilting, or settling of the ground beneath them. Ground cracks will remain after the eruption is over and can pose a threat to unwary people and animals if the cracks are obscured by heavy vegetation. 

LAVA FLOW HAZARD ZONE MAPS.

Maps showing volcanic hazard zones on the island of Hawaii were first prepared in 1974 by Donal Mullineaux and Donald Peterson of the U.S. Geological Survey and were revised in 1987. The current map divides the island into zones that are ranked from 1 through 9 based on the probability of coverage by lava flows. Other direct hazards from eruptions, such as tephra fallout and ground cracking and settling, are not specifically considered on this map; however, these hazards also tend to be greatest in the areas of highest hazard from lava flows. 

The island of Hawaii is divided into zones according to the degree of hazard from lava flows. Zone 1 is the area of the greatest hazard, Zone 9 of the least. To read more about a particular volcano or zone, click on the area of interest in the map or on the text links below. 

Hazard zones from lava flows are based chiefly on the location and frequency of both historic and prehistoric eruptions. "Historic eruptions" include those for which there are written records, beginning in the early 1800's, and those that are known from the oral traditions of the Hawaiians. Our knowledge of prehistoric eruptions is based on geologic mapping and dating of the old flows of each volcano. The hazard zones also take into account the larger topographic features of the volcanoes that will affect the distribution of lava flows. Finally, any hazard assessment is based on the assumption that future eruptions will be similar to those in the past. 

HAZARD ZONES FOR LAVA FLOWS.
Hazard zone boundaries are approximate. The change in the degree of hazard from one zone to the next is generally gradual rather than abrupt, and the change can occur over the distance of a mile or more. Within a single hazard zone, the severity of hazard may vary on a scale too fine to map. These variations may be the result of gradual changes that extend across the entire zone. For example, the hazard posed by lava flows decreases gradually as the distance from vents increases. 
There may be abrupt changes, however, in the relative hazard because of the 
local topography. For example, the hills behind Ninole stand high above the adjacent slopes of Mauna Loa and consequently are at a much lower risk from lava flows than the surrounding area, even though the entire area is included in a single zone. To determine the hazard differences within a single zone, more detailed studies are required. 

Volcanic and Seismic Hazards on the Island of Hawaii: Earthquake Hazards.



EARTHQUAKE HAZARDS.


Recent earthquakes on and near the Island of Hawaii, 1962-1985. 
The Island of Hawaii experiences thousands of earthquakes each year; most are so small that they can only be detected by instruments, but some are strong enough to be felt, and a few cause minor-to-moderate damage. Most of Hawaii's earthquakes are directly related to volcanic activity and are caused by magma moving beneath the earth's surface. Earthquakes may occur before or during an eruption, or they may result from the underground movement of magma that comes close to the surface but does not erupt. A few of the island's earthquakes are less directly related to volcanism; these earthquakes originate in zones of structural weakness at the base of the volcanoes or deep within the earth beneath the island. 
Strong earthquakes endanger people and property by shaking structures and by causing ground cracks, ground settling, and landslides. Strong earthquakes in Hawaii's past have destroyed buildings, water tanks, and bridges, and have disrupted water, sewer, and utility lines. Locally, such damage can be intensified where soft, water-saturated soils amplify earthquake ground motions. On steep slopes, such soils may fail during an earthquake, resulting in mudflows or landslides. An indirect hazard produced by some earthquakes is a tsunami, a large sea wave that can be far more damaging than any of the direct seismic hazards. 
The size of an earthquake is commonly expressed by its magnitude on the Richter scale, which is a measure of the relative size of the earthquake wave recorded on seismographs. An increase of one whole number on the Richter scale represents a tenfold increase in the amplitude of the seismograph recording. Earthquakes greater than about magnitude 3 usually can be felt by people near the source area, those greater than magnitude 5 are potentially damaging, and any earthquake of magnitude 7 or greater that occurs near populated areas is certain to cause widespread property damage. 
The earthquakes directly associated with the movement of magma are concentrated beneath the island's active volcanoes, Kilauea and Mauna Loa. Very shallow earthquakes frequently precede or accompany an eruption. Hundreds of such earthquakes make up swarms that commonly occur over a period of several hours or days before an eruption as magma forces its way into a new area. These earthquakes are seldom large enough to cause widespread damage, but they may produce extensive ground fracturing close to the potential eruption site. Once an eruption begins, the earthquakes usually diminish. 
Other earthquakes beneath the active volcanoes are generated by the pressures exerted by magma that never reaches the surface. Kilauea's east rift zone is continually being wedged apart by the injection of new magma, much of which is stored underground deep within the rift zone. Since the north flank of Kilauea is immobilized by the adjacent mass of Mauna Loa, the south flank, which faces the ocean, must move outward to make room for the additional magma. Periodically, Kilauea's south flank abruptly shifts seaward in response to this pressure, causing earthquakes. Most such earthquakes are small, but a few are large and can cause damage. 
             
Generalized locations of damaging earthquakes of magnitude 6 or greater since 1868 on the Island of Hawaii. The same earthquakes are listed in the accompanying table. The magnitudes marked by an (*) are based on eyewitness accounts of the earthquakes' effects and on reports of damage. Since about 1950, the accuracy of location, magnitude, and depth determinations has continually improved as the capability of seismic instruments has increased. 


In 1975, Kilauea's south flank was the site of the magnitude 7.2 Kalapana earthquake, the highest magnitude event in this century. The Kalapana coast subsided as much as 11 feet, generating a huge tsunami that claimed two lives in Hawaii Volcanoes National Park, destroyed houses in Punaluu, sank fishing boats in Keauhou Bay, and damaged boats and piers in Hilo. The most recent large earthquake on Kilauea's south flank occurred in June 1989. With a magnitude of 6.1, this quake caused much less damage than the 1975 event. 
       
House destroyed in June 25, 1989, earthquake in Kalapana. 
Earthquakes occur for similar reasons beneath Mauna Loa's southwest and southeast flanks. The Kealakekua fault zone on Hawaii's Kona coast was the site of an earthquake of about magnitude 6.9 in 1951 that may have been related to the 1950 eruption of Mauna Loa's southwest rift zone. The largest Hawaiian earthquake in recorded history occurred in 1868 beneath the Ka'u district on the southeast flank of Mauna Loa; it had an estimated magnitude of between 7.5 and 8.1. The 1868 earthquake caused damage across the entire island and was felt as far away as the Island of Kauai. The devastation was greatest in the Ka'u district, where an earthquake-triggered mudflow killed 31 people and coastal subsidence produced a tsunami that destroyed several villages. At least 79 people perished during this earthquake; most of these casualties resulted from the landslide and tsunami. 
Earthquakes in the Kaoiki region, centered between Kilauea and Mauna Loa, are also thought to be related to stresses in the earth's crust that are produced by the activity of the two volcanoes. In the last half century, earthquakes with magnitudes from 5.5 to 6.6 have shaken the Kaoiki region about once every 10 years. The latest large earthquake in this area had a magnitude of 6.6 and occurred in 1983. This event caused substantial damage to structures in Ka'u, Puna, and North and South Hilo districts. Ground cracking and settling led to temporary road closures, and landslides occurred on steep slopes. The financial losses caused by the earthquake were estimated at $7 million. Fortunately, there were only minor injuries because the earthquake struck early in the morning when most people were still in bed. 
Large earthquakes unrelated to volcanic activity also occur at irregular intervals on the Island of Hawaii. In 1973, a magnitude 6.2 earthquake located 25 miles beneath Honomu, north of Hilo, injured 11 people and caused $5.6 million worth of damage. Such earthquakes have no known recurrence interval and are difficult to predict. 
       
Hilo building damaged by the November 1983 Kaoiki earthquake. 
Defining hazard zones for the effects of earthquakes is more difficult than for eruptions and has not been attempted for the Island of Hawaii. For the most part, earthquakes on Hawaii are concentrated beneath Kilauea and Mauna Loa, particularly beneath the south flanks of both volcanoes, and in the Kaoiki region between them. The likelihood of a damaging earthquake on Kilauea or Mauna Loa probably increases with long-lived activity of the rift zones, but its precise time and magnitude are impossible to predict. 
Small, non-damaging earthquakes will be felt more frequently by people living on the slopes of these volcanoes. The effects of a large earthquake under Kilauea or Mauna Loa, however, will not be limited to the immediate area and may cause damage over much of the island. Similarly, deep earthquakes, such as the 1973 Honomu earthquake, can take place under any part of the island and can produce damaging effects over a wide area. 
One problem in assigning seismic hazard zones to the island is that the ground shaking during a strong earthquake may vary within a small area. This variation is because the effects of earthquakes are closely related to the nature of the underlying ground; for example, whether it is mainly lava bedrock or soil. Two homes in the same neighborhood may suffer different degrees of damage depending on the properties of the ground upon which they are built. In addition, local topography strongly affects earthquake hazards. Steep slopes composed of loose material may produce large landslides during an earthquake. 
The risk from living in a seismically active area, unlike that of living in an area prone to being covered by lava, also depends to a large degree on the type of construction used in a given home. Earthquake shaking may damage certain types of houses, while leaving other types of construction unscathed. For all of these reasons, earthquake hazards are highly localized, and it is difficult to define broad zones with the same relative degree of hazard. 
 
TSUNAMIS.

       
This map shows how many hours it would take for a tsunami generated anywhere on the rim of the Pacific basin to reach Hawaii. The dots indicate the locations of earthquakes that have generated tsunamis which have affected Hawaii. 
Tsunamis are large, rapidly moving ocean waves triggered by a major disturbance of the ocean floor, which is usually caused by an earthquake but sometimes can be produced by a submarine landslide or a volcanic eruption. Tsunamis are also referred to as "tidal waves," but they have no relation to tides. 
Ships at sea cannot detect a passing tsunami, nor can the waves be seen from aircraft. While passing through deep oceans, a tsunami consists of a series of waves that are only a few feet high and a hundred miles or more apart. These waves typically travel at speeds of about 600 mph. As they reach shallow water, the waves slow down but greatly increase in height, and the distance between them shrinks. When the tsunami finally strikes the coast, the waves may crest to heights of 100 feet and travel inland at speeds of 30 mph. A series of waves may reach the coast at intervals of 5 to 40 minutes; the first wave is frequently not the largest. 
Tsunamis potentially destructive to the Big Island may originate anywhere around the rim of the Pacific Ocean, or they may be locally generated by earthquakes on or near this island. A tsunami produced by an earthquake on the coast of Chile will reach the Hawaiian Islands in about 15 hours, while one that originates in the Aleutian Islands will arrive in 4.5 to 5.5 hours. A locally generated tsunami gives much less warning; the waves may strike almost immediately after the earthquake occurs. 
About 50 tsunamis have been reported in the Hawaiian Islands since the early 1800's. Seven caused major damage, and two of these were locally generated. The most devastating tsunamis to hit the Island of Hawaii in this century occurred in 1946 and 1960. In both cases, the worst damage was inflicted on the northeastern coast of the island. The tsunami of 1946 originated in the Aleutian Islands, struck Hawaii without warning, and killed over 170 people, mainly at Laupahoehoe and Hilo where the wave heights averaged 30 feet. The maximum wave height was 55 feet at Pololu Valley on the northern tip of the island. The 1960 tsunami originated in Chile and advanced upon the island from the southeast; again, its effects were greatest at Hilo. The arrival time of this tsunami was correctly predicted, but many people failed to heed the warnings, and authorities evacuated an insufficient area of Hilo. As a result, 61 lives were lost as waves up to 35 feet high crashed through homes. Whole city blocks were swept clean of all buildings, and 580 acres were flooded. 
The tsunamis of 1868 and 1975 were locally generated by earthquakes beneath the southern coast of the island. The 1868 waves destroyed several coastal villages in the Ka'u and Puna districts, most of which were never rebuilt. The 1975 tsunami claimed two lives and caused widespread damage along the Kalapana coast. 


A giant wave engulfs the Hilo pier during the 1946 tsunami. The red arrow points to a man who was swept away seconds later. 
             
Tsunami destruction on Kamehameha Avenue on Hilo's waterfront, 1946. 


Following the disastrous tsunami of 1946, a tsunami warning system for the Pacific basin was developed by the U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey. Presently, the Pacific Tsunami Warning System, which has its headquarters in Honolulu, is administered by the National Weather Service under the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). The Tsunami Warning Center receives a constant flow of information from seismometers (instruments that detect earthquakes) and tide-gauge stations all around the Pacific Ocean. When an earthquake with the potential to generate a tsunami occurs, the Warning Center puts out a "tsunami watch" within 30-40 minutes, alerting Civil Defense and other authorities of a possible tsunami. The first positive evidence of a tsunami comes from tide stations near the origin of the earthquake. Once the presence of a wave is confirmed, the Honolulu center issues a "tsunami warning," giving an estimated time of arrival for the first wave. When a warning is issued, local authorities evacuate low-lying coastal areas. 
Because the speed of a tsunami depends entirely on the depth of the water, the arrival time of a wave from any point on the Pacific rim can be predicted. The size of the wave is difficult to predict, however, because the Hawaiian Islands may be the first place to be hit by the wave. The effects of each new tsunami, and the effects on different coasts of the same tsunami, vary greatly. The size and destructiveness of the waves at any particular site are largely determined by the local topography, both onshore and offshore, and the direction from which the wave approaches. For these reasons, people should not become complacent just because one tsunami warning ends with only a few inches' rise in water level. The next time, a warning could precede a 55-foot wave. 
Locally generated tsunamis, such as those of 1868 and 1975, are potentially the most hazardous type, because the time between their origin and the arrival of the wave at the shoreline may be too brief to warn and evacuate people. In 1975, the first wave reached Punalu'u immediately after the earthquake; it arrived at Hilo in 20 minutes. Any earthquake strong enough to cause difficulty in standing or walking should be regarded as a tsunami warning by people in coastal areas, who should immediately head for higher ground. 

LIVING WITH VOLCANIC AND SEISMIC HAZARDS.

The best defense against any natural hazard is education. Residents and public officials should be aware of the hazards in a given area so that they can make rational decisions regarding where to build homes, develop property for commercial use, and locate public facilities. A well-informed public will neither overreact to the hazards nor ignore them. 
             
The Mauna Loa eruption of 1984 fed a major lava flow that advanced toward the city of Hilo. (Photograph provided by National Park Service) 
             
The Wahaula Visitor Center in Hawaii Volcanoes National Park was overrun by lava flows in June 1989. 


When an area is threatened by a nearby eruption or an approaching lava flow, the hazard to life can be minimized by evacuating people. The repeated evacuation of residential areas near active rift zones comes at a high cost, however, both for the county government and taxpayers and for the people whose property is threatened by lava. For the long term, volcanic hazards can be avoided by land-use zoning that restricts building in the areas of highest hazard. 
       
The magnitude 6.6 Kaoiki earthquake in 1983 caused ground cracks and 
landslides on the rim of Kilauea's summit caldera.

Diverting lava flows by artificial means is a largely untested and costly option for protecting developed areas. Well-placed barriers may successfully divert a short-lived lava flow, but during a longer eruption, keeping up with the sheer volume of lava and the number of flows involved may prove impossible. During the 1955 eruption of Kilauea's east rift zone, barriers temporarily diverted flows from two different plantations, but in both cases, flows on subsequent days took different routes and ultimately destroyed the property. 
Although a few attempts at lava diversion have been partially successful elsewhere in the world, such efforts require favorable conditions of topography and property ownership that can rarely be met in a populated area. Artificial diversion of lava onto property that otherwise would have been spared could lead to complex legal problems. Lava diversion, however, is a reasonable option in unpopulated areas where isolated, high-value property is at risk. For example, diversion structures have been constructed in Hawaii to protect the Mauna Loa Observatory, NOAA's atmospheric research station, from future lava flows. The potential for damage from strong earthquakes cannot be avoided on the Island of Hawaii. The damage could be reduced, however, by land-use zoning that restricts building on or near steep slopes that may fail during earthquakes and in areas underlain by materials that are likely to amplify the ground motion of a strong earthquake. The Island of Hawaii is in Zone 4 of the Uniform Building Code, which requires public and certain types of private buildings to meet structural design standards for earthquake resistance. Information about the Building Code can be obtained from the Hawaii County Building Division of the Public Works Department. 
Tsunamis are a potential threat to all low-lying coastal areas of the island. The tsunami risk to new developments can be minimized by restrictive zoning, such as already exists on Hilo's waterfront, and by flood-resistant construction. Since much of Hawaii's coast is already developed, evacuation of low-lying areas in response to tsunami warnings is the only practical option for avoiding loss of life. 
More information about the tsunami warning system, evacuation routes, and emergency procedures can be obtained from the Hawaii County Civil Defense. 
 
SELECTED READINGS.


Lava enters the ocean on Kilauea's southern coast in October 1988.
Decker, R.W., Wright, T.L., and Stauffer, P.H., 1987, editors, Volcanism in Hawaii: U.S. Geological Survey Professional Paper 1350, vol. 1. (This volume contains the following four papers, from which much of the information in this publication is derived.) 
Holcomb, R.T., 1987, Eruptive history and long-term behavior of Kilauea Volcano, p. 261-350. 
Lockwood, J.P., and Lipman, P.W., 1987, Holocene eruptive history of Mauna Loa Volcano, p. 509-535. 
Moore, R.B., Clague, D.A., Meyer, R., and Bohrson, W.A., 1987, Hualalai Volcano: A preliminary summary of geologic, petrologic, and geophysical data, p. 571-585. 
Mullineaux, D. R. , Peterson, D.W. , and Crandell, D.R., 1987, Volcanic hazards in the Hawaiian Islands, p. 599-621. 
Macdonald, G.A., Abbott, A.T., and Peterson, F.L., 1983, Volcanoes in the sea: The geology of Hawaii: University of Hawaii Press, Honolulu, 517 p. 
Tilling, R.I., Heliker, C., and Wright, T.L., 1987, Eruptions of Hawaiian volcanoes: Past, present, and future: U.S. Geological Survey general interest publication, 54 p. 
Wright, T.L., Chun, J.Y.F., Esposo, J., Heliker, C., Hodge, J., Lockwood, J.P., and Vogt, S., 1992, Map showing lava-flow hazard zones, Island of Hawaii, 1:250,000: U.S.G.S. Misc. Field studies map MF-2193. 

<#USGS4>
*
Monitoring Active Volcanoes 
By Robert I. Tilling

COVER PHOTOGRAPH: Scientist measures 350-meter-high fountain during March 1983 eruption at Kilauea Volcano, Hawaii.  Lava fountains, approximately 100 meters high, play at the vent during the September 1977 eruption of Kilauea Volcano. New lava flows and downed trees in foreground. (Photo by Boone Morrison.) Geologist records data at Redoubt Volcano, Alaska, while operating a Correlation Spectrometer (COSPEC), to measure the amount of sulfur dioxide in volcanic plumes.  
Introduction.
One of the most spectacular, awesomely beautiful, and at times destructive displays of natural energy is an erupting volcano, belching fume and ash thousands of meters into the atmosphere and pouring out red-hot molten lava in fountains and streams.
Countless eruptions in the geologic past have produced volcanic rocks that form much of the Earth's present surface. The gradual disintegration and weathering of these rocks have yielded some of the richest farmlands in the world, and these fertile soils play a significant role in sustaining our large and growing population. Were it not for volcanic activity, the Hawaiian Islands-- with their sugar cane and pineapple fields and magnificent landscapes and seascapes--would not exist to support their residents and to charm their visitors. Yet the actual eruptive processes are catastrophic and can claim life and property. 
Eruptions of the volcanoes that dot the margins of the moving rigid plates of the Earth's crust characteristically are violently explosive. For example, in 1902 a single explosive eruption of Mount Pelee, Island of Martinique in the Lesser Antilles, virtually destroyed the entire city of St. Pierre, killing some 30,000 people. On the other hand, eruptions of the Hawaiian basaltic shield volcanoes generally are nonexplosive and more benign, posing a threat to property but rarely to life. For example, lava flows of the 1960 eruption of Kilauea Volcano burned and buried the small village of Kapoho on the eastern tip of the island of Hawaii. Not a single person was injured or killed, however, because warning signals of impending eruptive activity were detected in time to permit safe evacuation of Kapoho residents. 
About 500 active volcanoes are known on the Earth, not counting those that lie beneath the sea. Scientists have estimated that at least 200,000 persons have lost their lives as a result of volcanic eruptions during the last 500 years. Little wonder that people living in the shadow of active or dormant volcanoes have feared eruptive outbreaks in times past and present. 
Centuries ago, the Romans attributed volcanic and related phenomena (including earthquakes) mainly to the movement of wind imprisoned inside the Earth rushing violently to the surface. The Polynesians believed volcanic activity to be caused by the beautiful but wrathful Pele, Goddess of Volcanoes, whenever she was angered by actions of other deities or mortals. Today, scientists know that volcanic eruptions occur when buoyant magma (molten rock) that formed deep in the Earth ascends to the surface and ultimately is ejected upon release of gas pressure. More importantly, with precise instruments and refined data analysis, it is now possible to track the subsurface movements of magma by monitoring the earthquakes and measuring the ground changes that accompany such movements. 
       
Aerial view shows Hawaiian Volcano Observatory on the rim of Kilauea's crater. 

Although the present state of knowledge does not permit the prediction of the exact time and place of eruptions, we can detect departures from usual behavior that augur impending activity. Systematic monitoring studies are conducted on only a few active volcanoes--those in Hawaii, and some in Italy, Japan, New Zealand, and Kamchatka (Russia). Most of the active volcanoes are not monitored, little understood, and hence, extremely hazardous if located in populated regions. 
 
MONITORING TECHNIQUES.

Schematic diagrams show three commonly observed stages in the course of a typical Hawaiian eruption. See text for additional discussion. (Modified from illustration by John D. Unger in Earthquake Information Bulletin, 1974, v. 6, p. 7.) 
Volcano monitoring involves the recording and analysis of measurable phenomena such as ground movements, earthquakes, variations in gas compositions, and deviations in local electrical and magnetic fields that reflect pressure and stresses induced by the subterranean magma movements. To date, monitoring of earthquakes and ground deformation before, during, and following eruptions has provided the most reliable criteria in predicting volcanic activity, although other geochemical and geophysical techniques hold great promise. 
Most of the commonly used monitoring methods were largely pioneered and developed by the Hawaiian Volcano Observatory (HVO), established in 1912 by Thomas Jaggar, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and operated continuously by the U.S. Geological Survey since 1948. The many years of continuous observations of Kilauea and Mauna Loa, two of the world's most active volcanoes, have fostered fundamental developments in instrumentation and measurement techniques, which are increasingly used in the study of other active volcanoes the world over. Moreover, early major advances in seismic research at HVO contributed significantly to subsequent systematic investigations of earthquake and related crustal processes, now conducted as part of the Geological Survey's Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program. 
The volcanic plumbing and reservoir system beneath Kilauea can be pictured schematically as a balloon buried under thin layers of sand and plaster. When magma is fed into the reservoir (analogous to air filling a balloon), the internal pressure increases, and the sand-plaster surface layers are pushed upward and outward in order to accommodate the swelling or inflation. The net effects of such inflation include the steepening of slope of the volcano's surface; increases in horizontal and vertical distances between points on the surface; and, in places, the fracturing of rock layers stretched beyond the breaking point. Such rupturing of materials adjusting to magma-movement pressures results in earthquakes. A shrinking or rapidly draining reservoir to feed surface eruptions (analogous to deflating or popping the balloon) would produce the opposite effects: flattening of slopes, reduction in distances between surface points, and decrease in earthquake frequency. 
Changes in slope in a real volcano can be measured precisely by various electronic mechanical "tiltmeters" or field tilt surveying techniques, which, for example, can detect the change in slope of a kilometer-long board if raised by the thickness of a dime placed under one end. Similarly, minute changes in horizontal distances can be measured by an instrument that uses a laser beam; tiny changes in vertical distances can be measured by making a series of precise levelling surveys. Such changes can be easily detected to a precision of only a few parts per million. The notion of one part per million can be dramatized in terms of a very dry martini--1 drop of vermouth per 16 gallons of gin. The frequency, location, and magnitude of earthquakes generated by magma movement can be easily and accurately determined by data obtained from a properly designed seismic network. The Hawaiian Volcano Observatory has recently expanded its seismic networks to 45 stations to record the earthquake activity of Kilauea and Mauna Loa on a round-the-clock basis. 


       
HVO scientist makes horizontal distance measurement with a "geodimeter," an electronic-laser beam instrument. 


The continuous monitoring of earthquakes and changes in volcano shape alone is not sufficient for predicting eruptions, however. The proper analysis of present-day data requires a basic understanding of the prehistoric eruptive record and behavior of a volcano that can only be reconstructed from regional geophysical, geochemical, and geologic studies using modern age-dating methods. Such glimpses into a volcano's prehistoric past are critically important because historic records extend over too short a time to permit the making of reliable predictions of future behavior. 



Protected against radiant heat by foil-lined clothing and headgear, HVO scientists collect a sample of molten lava through the broken roof of a lava tube (a "skylight") using a steel cable with a weight at its end. 

SOME CASE STUDIES.
       
Summit caldera and pit craters on Mauna Loa, Hawaii. The inset shows Mauna Loa as it appears from the Hawaiian Volcano Observatory, 240 kilometers away. 
Investigations carried out as part of the USGS Volcano Hazards Program provide case studies of monitoring two of the world's most active and best understood volcanoes, Mauna Loa and Kilauea on the "Big Island" of Hawaii. Since 1980, the USGS has expanded its monitoring studies to include other volcanoes in the United States and, in cooperation with foreign scientists, in a few other countries. 
Mauna Loa Volcano erupted in July 1975, following a quarter century of inactivity. The first hint of change leading up to the 1975 eruption was a marked increase in the number of earthquakes beginning in April 1974, more than a year before the eruption. Inflation or swelling of the summit of Mauna Loa was detected 4 months later during the annual "laser beam" remeasurement of horizontal distances across the summit crater. The 1974 set of measurements showed the first significant increases in the horizontal distances of the lines across the summit crater since the beginning of the precise distance monitoring program in 1967. The Hawaiian Volcano Observatory immediately alerted Hawaiian officials and the general public to the possible reawakening of Mauna Loa from its long slumber. 
During the next 12 months, both the ground deformation and seismic networks on Mauna Loa were expanded. Records showed that the numbers of earthquakes and the rate of summit inflation increased steadily, reaching a climax during the summit eruption that began on July 5, 1975. The exact timing of the eruption could not be predicted, even though all premonitory indicators pointed toward an eruption any day. Although the earthquake frequency tapered off sharply in the weeks following the July eruption, swelling of the summit resumed, indicating that magma was continuing to accumulate in Mauna Loa's summit reservoir. Measurements made on six separate occasions over a period of a year and a half following the eruption all confirmed continued swelling. From analysis of the written records of the past historic eruptive behavior and the fact that both the earthquakes and swelling had extended out along the northeast rift, Observatory scientists suggested that a flank eruption on the northeast rift was likely sometime before the summer of 1978, .if Mauna Loa were to behave as it had for the past 200 years. This conclusion was conveyed to members of the Hawaiian Congressional delegation and Hawaii Civil Defense officials, announced to the media, and published in a scientific journal. 
In fact, Mauna Loa did not erupt again until March 1984. The eruption began at the summit and spread to the northeast rift zone in a few hours. The resulting lava flows advanced to within 6 kilometers of Hilo before the 3-week-long eruption ended in early April. 
These recent developments show that a few years of intensive monitoring and the short historic record (about 200 years) are simply inadequate to establish statistically reliable probabilities for the exact time and place of the next eruption. 
Kilauea has been closely monitored for a longer period of time than Mauna Loa, but the necessary state of knowledge for prediction of eruptive activity has not been achieved. There have been some notable successes, however. For example, in the late 1960's and early 1970's, several eruptions were predicted with sufficient certainty 4 to 8 hours in advance, so that HVO scientists could advise officials of Hawaii Volcanoes National Park to evacuate certain sections. The park rangers were able to clear park visitors safely from the actual outbreak areas in ample time. But there also have been false alarms-- when all of the premonitory indicators signaled movement of magma from the summit reservoir, only to have the magma injected into the rift zones below ground without breaking through to the surface. 
The latest eruption at Kilauea began in January 1983 along the east rift zone. Spectacular lava fountains in the first 3 years of the eruption produced lava flows that moved rapidly down the volcano's south flank and destroyed homes in the Royal Gardens subdivision. In 1986, the site of the eruption changed to a different vent. This phase of the eruption has produced much less magma, but even so many homes in the coastal town of Kalapana have been destroyed. 
       
Mount St. Helens about noon on May 18, 1980, some 3 hours after the beginning of the catastrophic eruption that devastated the area north of the volcano and showered ash over much of eastern Washington. 
In March 1980, Mount St. Helens, one of the explosive volcanoes of the Cascade Range in the Pacific Northwest, roared back to life after being dormant for 123 years. Mount St. Helens' activity climaxed with the catastrophic eruption of May 18, 1980, which caused the worst volcanic disaster in the recorded history of the United States. Mount St. Helens continues to be intermittently but weakly active--most recently in 1991--and may remain active for years or even decades. In 1981, the Geological Survey established the David A. Johnston Cascades Volcano Observatory (CVO) in memory of the USGS volcanologist killed during the May 1980 eruption. This facility is a sister facility to the Hawaiian Volcano Observatory and serves as the headquarters for the continued monitoring of Mount St. Helens as well as for monitoring studies of other potentially active Cascade volcanoes. 

The Geological Survey has published several fully illustrated volumes on the 
1980 eruptions of Mount St. Helens:



Lipman, P.W., and Mullineaux, D. R., 1981, editors, The 1980 eruptions of Mount St. Helens, Washington: U.S. Geological Survey Professional Paper 1250, 844 p. (The most comprehensive collection of scientific articles available to date, containing 62 reports on diverse aspects of the 1980 eruptions.)

Foxworthy, B.L., and Hill, Mary, 1982, Volcano eruptions of 1980 at Mount St. Helens: The first 100 days: U.S. Geological Survey Professional Paper 1249, 125 p. (A description of the events during the first 100 days of the eruptive activity in nontechnical language that serves as a backdrop for the more technical articles in Professional Paper 1250.)

Tilling, R.l., 1987, Eruptions of Mount St. Helens: Past, Present, and Future: Reston, Va., U.S. Geological Survey general interest publication, 46 p. (A nontechnical overview of the geology and history of the past and present eruptive activity at Mt. St. Helens and speculations about its future behavior.) 


In March and April of 1982, El Chichón--an obscure and largely forgotten volcano in southeastern Mexico--erupted violently. During three major explosive bursts (March 28, April 3, and April 4), El Chichón spewed about the same volume of air-fall ash as Mount St. Helens did during May 18, 1980, and generated high-velocity, incandescent, ground-hugging ash flows that leveled villages within about 8 kilometers of the volcano. El Chichón's eruptions were the most destructive in Mexico's history; the number of deaths attributed to the eruptions is unknown, but may exceed 500. In addition, the El Chichón eruptions were much more gas-rich than was the May 1980 eruption of Mount St. Helens and injected a very large volume of aerosols (mainly sulfuric acid particles) into the stratosphere. Unfortunately, although El Chichón was "discovered" in 1928, no systematic monitoring studies were carried out. Thus the 1982 eruptions came as a tragic surprise. 
       
HVO scientists making magnetic and geoelectric measurements over an active lava tube on Kilauea's East Rift Zone with the source vent Pu'u O'o in the background. 
In May 1980 the Mammoth Lakes resort area in California, on the eastern slope of the Sierra Nevada mountain range, was racked by a historically unprecedented series of earthquakes. Since then, accelerated seismic and ground deformation monitoring studies have shown measurable uplift of the ground--as much as 50 centimeters locally. The Mammoth Lakes area lies in the southwestern part of the Long Valley Caldera, a large volcanic crater formed by collapse during violent eruptions about 700,000 years ago. Scientists are interpreting the persistent, but periodic, unrest to be related to subsurface movement of magma known to lie a few miles below the caldera. Intensive monitoring of the region is continuing to detect the earliest precursors of possible renewed volcanic activity. 

       
Leveling survey on Kilauea's east rift zone with Pu'u O;o in the background. 

A small eruption occurred in November 1985 at the summit of Nevado del Ruiz, a glacier-capped volcano in the Andes in Colombia, South America. The hot volcanic ejecta melted snow and ice, and the meltwater then mixed with loose volcanic debris to trigger devastating mudflows that swept down several valleys and killed more than 25,000 people, causing the second worst volcanic disaster in the world in this century. In contrast to the El Chichon disaster in 1982, the Ruiz eruption did not come as a surprise. Scientists had known for a year earlier that the volcano was showing signs of possible eruptive activity. Unfortunately, despite recommendations made by volcanologists, no definitive volcano-monitoring studies were mounted until only several months before the eruption. While useful, the few monitoring data were inadequate to provide the detailed information required for proper contingency planning. Nonetheless, post-disaster analyses clearly have documented that the 1985 Ruiz disaster could have been averted had the civil authorities acted more effectively. A nagging question, however, remains unanswered: Might the authorities have taken more decisive action if they had been provided longer term and diagnostic monitoring data? We will never know. The tragic lesson from the Ruiz case study is that, for volcano-monitoring data to be most useful, they must be gathered and analyzed for a long time--the longer the better--before a volcanic crisis develops. 
       
Geologist programs an automated video time-lapse system on the north flank of Redoubt Volcano in Alaska. 
In March 1988, under a cooperative program between the USGS and the state of Alaska, the Alaska Volcano Observatory (AVO) was formed. The facility significantly extends the USGS' capability for monitoring the active volcanoes of the Alaska Peninsula and the Aleutian Islands. The scientists of AVO, together with colleagues from its sister observatories (HVO and CVO), have been busy monitoring the eruption of volcanoes located along the Cook Inlet southwest of Anchorage, Alaska, including Redoubt Volcano and Mount Spurr. Seismic monitoring provided the first warning signals of the 1989 eruption of Redoubt Volcano, and the AVO's current monitoring includes monitoring of ground deformation as well as volcanic gas emissions. 

CONCLUSIONS.
Since 1977, significant advances have been made in the measurement of gas emissions to monitor active volcanoes. The underlying principle in gas monitoring is that changes in the composition of the emissions are related to major subsurface movement of magma. In general, as the magma rises closer to the surface, the magmatic component of the gas mixture, collected and analyzed at the surface, increases at the expense of nonmagmatic gases derived mainly from the atmosphere and meteoric waters. Currently at Kilauea more than 10 different species of gas are monitored at 25 sites, sampled at least twice a week, to try to detect departures from "normal" or background amounts. The data from this systematic gas monitoring show that the changes in composition of the emissions can be related to the inflation (swelling) and deflation (shrinking) of the magma reservoir. 
       
Snow-covered Mount Rainier, rising behind Tacoma, Washington. Because of its historic activity and proximity to major population centers, Mount Rainier is targeted for intensified study during the coming decade. Measurements of sulfur dioxide gas have proved useful at Mount St. Helens, Kilauea, and other volcanoes. The continuous monitoring of hydrogen emissions at Mount St. Helens, Kilauea, Mauna Loa, and Mammoth Lakes is currently being done remotely by using sophisticated electrochemical sensors and satellite transmission of collected data. Data obtained to date suggest that the monitoring of hydrogen emissions promises to be an effective technique, especially at places too inaccessible and/or dangerous for frequent direct gas sampling by conventional means. 
Tremendous strides have been made in recent years in intensifying the monitoring of Mauna Loa and Kilauea as part of the Volcano Hazards Program, and understanding of the typically nonexplosive, Hawaiian-type of volcanism has increased markedly. But reliable and specific prediction capability for eruptions in Hawaii still eludes the scientists. The predictive capability is much poorer for explosive volcanoes, such as those in the Cascade Range of the northwestern United States (Mount Rainier, Mount Hood, Mount Lassen), Alaska, and elsewhere around the Circum-Pacific "Ring of Fire." The explosive Cascade volcanoes (for example, Mount St. Helens), which have erupted only rarely within recorded historic times, are potentially much more destructive and deadly than Hawaiian volcanoes. Should they erupt violently, large population centers in the northwest, such as Seattle and Portland, could be threatened by mudflows and ashfalls if wind directions are unfavorable. Clearly, present intensive monitoring of Hawaiian volcanoes should be maintained, and fundamental studies and systematic monitoring of the Cascade and Alaskan volcanoes should be expanded and accelerated. 

<#USGS5>
*
Eruptions of Hawaiian Volcanoes: Past, Present, and Future.
By Robert I. Tilling, Christina Heliker, and Thomas L. Wright
Eruption of Kilauea Volcano, as viewed the dawn of January 30, 1974. Overflows from an active lava lake spill down the flank of the volcanic shield at Mauna Ulu, built by many such overflows since 1969. The height of this shield was nearly 400 feet when the Mauna Ulu eruptions ended in July 1974. (Photograph by Robert I. Tilling.) Cover photograph: Lava cascades fed by fountains at vent (skyline) fall more than 75 feet to fill Aloi Crater during the 1969-71 Mauna Ulu eruption of Kilauea Volcano. (Photograph by Donald A. Swanson.) First Printing, 1987.Special thanks go to Taeko Jane Takahashi and J.D. Griggs, Hawaiian Volcano Observatory, for assistance with photography selection and to Martha Kiger for graphics design.
Preface.
Lava shoots 1,000 feet into the air during a high-fountaining episode of the 1983-to-present Pu'u 'O'o eruption of Kilauea Volcano. (Photograph by J.D. Griggs.) Viewing an erupting volcano is a memorable experience, one that has inspired fear, superstition, worship, curiosity, and fascination throughout the history of mankind. In modern times, volcanic phenomena have attracted intense scientific interest, because they provide the key to understanding processes that have created and shaped more than 80 percent of the Earth's surface. The active Hawaiian volcanoes have received special attention worldwide because of their frequent spectacular eruptions, which can be viewed and studied with relative ease and safety. In January 1987, the Hawaiian Volcano Observatory (HVO), located on the rim of Kilauea Volcano, celebrated its 75th Anniversary. In honor of HVO's Diamond Jubilee, the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) published Professional Paper 1350, an up-to-date summary of the many studies on Hawaiian volcanism by the USGS and other scientists. Drawing from the wealth of data contained in that volume, this booklet focuses on selected aspects of the eruptive history, style, and products of two of Hawaii's active volcanoes, Kilauea and Mauna Loa. This general-interest booklet is a companion to the one on Mount St. Helens Volcano published in 1984 (see Selected Readings). Together, these works illustrate the contrast between the two main types of volcanoes: shield volcanoes, such as those in Hawaii, which are typically nonexplosive; and composite volcanoes, such as Mount St. Helens in the Cascade Range, which are renowned for their explosive eruptions.      
Introduction.
"The loveliest fleet of islands that lies anchored in any ocean." --Mark Twain Few would quarrel with Mark Twain's vivid description of Hawaii, written after his 4-month stay in 1866. The Hawaiian Islands were discovered and settled around the 6th century A.D. by Polynesians sailing from islands, probably the Marquesas, in the southern tropical Pacific. Subsequently, a thousand years or more of cultural isolation passed before Hawaii was first visited by non-Polynesians. On January 18, 1778, during his third major voyage in the Pacific, the famous British navigator and explorer, Captain James Cook, sighted the Polynesians' secluded home. Cook named his discovery the "Sandwich Islands," in honor of the Earl of Sandwich, then First Lord of the British Admiralty. Mark Twain's fleet of islands is larger than Rhode Island and Connecticut combined. The island of Hawaii, commonly called the "Big Island," covers more than twice the total area of the other islands. Hawaii, which became our 50th state in 1959, is now home for more than one million people and hosts many times that number of visitors each year. The principal Hawaiian islands (all capital letters) are the exposed tops of volcanoes that rise tens of thousands of feet above the ocean floor. Some islands are made up of two or more volcanoes. Loihi Seamount, Hawaii's newest volcano, still lies about 3,100 feet beneath the sea. (Modified by permission from a map published by Dynamic Graphics, Inc., Berkeley, California.) Sketch map of the southeastern part of the island of Hawaii and adjacent offshore, showing the principal features and localities of Mauna Loa, Kilauea, and Loihi Volcanoes discussed in the text. Hawaii's worldwide image as an idyllic tropical paradise is well deserved. What is less well-known, however, is that the islands exist only because of nearly continuous volcanic activity. All of the prominent features of the Hawaiian Islands, such as Diamond Head on Oahu, Haleakala Crater on Maui, and the huge masses of Mauna Loa and Mauna Kea on the Big Island, are volcanic. Since the beginning of a historical record early in the 19th century, eruptions have occurred frequently at Mauna Loa and Kilauea; these two volcanoes on the Big Island are among the most active in the world. Nearby Loihi Seamount, off the Big Island's south coast, is the newest Hawaiian volcano, not yet visible above the ocean surface. Most eruptions of Mauna Loa and Kilauea are nonexplosive, and both volcanoes are readily accessible; scientists can study them at close range in relative safety. As a result, these are two of the most intensely observed and best understood volcanoes on our planet. Research on these active volcanoes provides a basis for understanding the life story of older, now inactive Hawaiian volcanoes and similar volcanoes worldwide. Hawaii serves as a superb natural laboratory for the study of volcanic eruptions. Liliuokalani Park, in the city of Hilo on the Big Island, typifies the tropical beauty and serenity of the Hawaiian Islands. (Photograph by John Penisten, Hilo, Hawaii.)  Origin of the Hawaiian Islands Map of the Pacific basin showing the location of the Hawaiian Ridge-Emperor Seamount Chain in relation to some other features and localities mentioned in the text. (Base map reprinted by permission from World Ocean Floor Panorama by Bruce C. Heezen and Marie Tharp, Copyright 1977.)The Hawaiian Islands are the tops of gigantic volcanic mountains formed by countless eruptions of fluid lava (1) over several million years; some tower more than 30,000 feet above the sea floor.(2) These volcanic peaks rising above the ocean surface represent only the tiny, visible part of an immense submarine ridge, the Hawaiian Ridge--Emperor Seamount Chain, composed of more than 80 large volcanoes. This range stretches across the Pacific sea floor from the Hawaiian Islands to the Aleutian Trench. The length of the Hawaiian Ridge segment alone, between the Big Island and Midway Island to the northwest, is about 1,600 miles, roughly the distance from Washington, D.C., to Denver, Colorado. The amount of lava erupted to form this huge ridge, about 186,000 cubic miles, is more than enough to cover the State of California with a mile-thick layer. (1) Scientists use the term lava for molten rock (and contained gases) that breaks through the Earth's surface, and the term magma for the molten rock underground. (2) The United States uses English units of measurements. For readers in the many countries that use metric units, a conversion table is given in the back of the booklet. 
Hawaiian legends and early scientific work. The distinctive northwest-southeast alignment of the Hawaiian chain was known to early explorers of the Pacific Ocean, including the Polynesians who first settled the islands. The ancient Hawaiians were superb sailors, excellent navigators, and keen observers of nature, including volcanic eruptions and their effects. They noticed the extent of erosion from island to island, the amount of vegetation on the slopes of the various volcanoes, the freshness of lava flows, and other indicators of the relative ages of the islands. The legends of the early Hawaiians clearly reveal that they recognized that the islands are progressively younger from the northwest to the southeast. Hawaiian legends tell that eruptions were caused by Pele, the beautiful but tempestuous Goddess of Volcanoes, during her frequent moments of anger. Pele was both revered and feared; her immense power and many adventures figured prominently in ancient Hawaiian songs and chants. She could cause earthquakes by stamping her feet and volcanic eruptions and fiery devastation by digging with the Pa'oa, her magic stick. An oft-told legend describes the long and bitter quarrel between Pele and her older sister Namakaokahai that led to the creation of the chain of volcanoes that form the islands. Above: Pele, the Goddess of Volcanoes, as portrayed by artist D. Howard Hitchcock. (Photograph by J.D. Griggs with permission of the Volcano House Hotel, owner of the original painting.) Below: Night view (time exposure) of Pele's home during the 1967-68 eruption within Halemaumau Crater. (Photograph by Richard S. Fiske.)  Pele first used her Pa'oa on Kauai, where she subsequently was attacked by Namakaokahai and left for dead. Recovering, she fled to Oahu, where she dug a number of "fire pits," including the crater we now call Diamond Head, the tourist's landmark of modern Honolulu. Pele then left her mark on the island of Molokai before traveling further southeast to Maui and creating Haleakala Volcano, which forms the eastern half of that island. By then Namakaokahai realized that Pele was still alive and went to Maui to do battle with her. After a terrific fight, Namakaokahai again believed that she had killed her younger sister, only to discover later, however, that Pele was very much alive and busily working at Mauna Loa Volcano on the island of Hawaii. Namakaokahai then conceded that she could never permanently crush her sister's indomitable spirit and gave up the struggle. Pele dug her final and eternal fire pit, Halemaumau Crater, at the summit of Kilauea Volcano, where she is said to reside to this day. The migration of volcanic activity from Kauai to Hawaii described by this Hawaiian legend is confirmed by modern scientific studies. The first geologic study of the Hawaiian Islands was conducted during 6 months in 1840-1841, as part of the U.S. Exploring Expedition of 1838-1842, commanded by Lieutenant Charles Wilkes of the U.S. Navy. The expedition's geological investigations were directed by James Dwight Dana. Though only 25 years old in 1838, Dana was no stranger to volcanoes. In 1834 he had studied Vesuvius, the active volcano near Naples, Italy. Dana and his colleagues recognized that the islands become increasingly younger from northwest to southeast along the Hawaiian volcanic chain, largely because of differences in their degree of erosion. The longer the length of time since its last eruption, the greater the erosion of the volcano. He also suggested that some other island chains in the Pacific showed a similar general decrease in age from northwest to southeast. The alignment of the Hawaiian Islands, Dana proposed, reflected localized volcanic activity along segments of a major fissure zone slashing across the ocean floor. Dana's "great fissure" origin for the islands served as a prominent working hypothesis for many subsequent studies until the mid-20th century. The monumental work of Dana -- considered to be the first American volcanologist -- resulted in greatly increased awareness of the Hawaiian volcanoes, which continue to attract much scientific attention.  Deeply eroded Koolau Volcano (left photograph), island of Oahu, is 2 to 3 million years older than Mauna Loa Volcano (right photograph), on the Big Island, which is unscarred by erosion. Snow-capped Mauna Loa is viewed from the east, and the Hawaiian Volcano Observatory (circled)can be seen on the west rim of Kilauea's summit crater (foreground). (Photographs by Richard S. Fiske.)  Most active volcanoes are located along or near the boundaries of the Earth's shifting tectonic plates. Hawaiian volcanoes, however, occur in the middle of the Pacific Plate. Not all of the Earth's more than 500 active volcanoes are shown. 
Plate tectonics and the Hawaiian "Hot Spot".
In the early 1960's, the related concepts of "seafloor spreading" and "plate tectonics" emerged as powerful new hypotheses that geologists used to interpret the features and movements of the Earth's surface layer. According to the plate-tectonics theory, the Earth's surface consists of about a dozen rigid slabs or plates, each averaging at least 50 miles thick. These plates move relative to one another at average speeds of a few inches per year--about as fast as human fingernails grow. Scientists recognize three common types of boundaries between these moving plates: (1 ) Divergent or spreading--adjacent plates pull apart, such as at the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, which separates the North and South American Plates from the Eurasian and African Plates. This pulling apart causes "sea-floor spreading" as new material is added to the oceanic plates. (2) Convergent--plates moving in opposite directions meet and one is dragged down (or subducted) beneath the other. Convergent plate boundaries are also called subduction zones and are typified by the Aleutian Trench, where the Pacific Plate is being subducted under the North American Plate. (3) Transform fault--one plate slides horizontally past another. The best known example is the earthquake-prone San Andreas fault zone of California, which marks the boundary between the Pacific and North American Plates. The great majority of the world's earthquakes and active volcanoes occur near the boundaries of the Earth's shifting plates. Why then are the Hawaiian volcanoes located near the middle of the Pacific Plate, more than 2,000 miles from the nearest plate boundary? In 1963, J. Tuzo Wilson, a Canadian geophysicist, provided an ingenious explanation within the framework of plate tectonics by proposing the "Hot Spot" hypothesis. Wilson's hypothesis has come to be accepted widely, because it agrees well with much of the scientific data on the Pacific Ocean in general, and the Hawaiian Islands in particular. According to Wilson, the distinctive linear shape of the Hawaiian-Emperor Chain reflects the progressive movement of the Pacific Plate over a deep immobile hot spot. This hot spot partly melts the region just below the overriding Pacific Plate, producing small, isolated blobs of magma. Less dense than the surrounding solid rock, the magma rises buoyantly through structurally weak zones and ultimately erupts as lava onto the ocean floor to form volcanoes. Over a span of about 70 million years, the combined processes of magma formation, eruption, and continuous movement of the Pacific Plate over the stationary hot spot have left the trail of volcanoes across the ocean floor that we now call the Hawaiian-Emperor Chain. Scientists interpret the sharp bend in the chain, about 2,200 miles northwest of the Big Island, as indicating a change in the direction of plate motion that occurred about 43 million years ago, as suggested by the ages of the volcanoes bracketing the bend. Part of the Big Island, the south-easternmost and youngest island, presently overlies the hot spot and still taps the magma source to feed its two currently active volcanoes, Kilauea and Mauna Loa. The active submarine volcano Loihi, off the Big Island's south coast, may mark the beginning of the zone of magma formation at the southeastern edge of the hot spot. The other Hawaiian islands have moved northwestward beyond the hot spot, were successively cut off from the sustaining magma source, and are no longer volcanically active. Artist's conception of the northwestward movement of the Pacific Plate over the fixed Hawaiian "Hot Spot" to illustrate the formation of the Hawaiian Ridge-Emperor Sea-mount Chain. (Modified from a drawing provided by Maurice Krafft, Centre de Volcanologie, Cernay, France.) The progressive northwesterly drift of the islands from their point of origin over the hot spot is well shown by the ages of the principal lava flows on the various Hawaiian Islands from northwest (oldest) to southeast (youngest), given in millions of years: Kauai, 5.6 to 3.8; Oahu, 3.4 to 2.2; Molokai, 1.8 to 1.3; Maui, 1.3 to 0.8; and Hawaii, less than 0.7 and still growing. Even on the Big Island alone, the relative ages of its five volcanoes are compatible with the hot-spot theory. Kohala, at the northwestern corner of the island, is the oldest, having ceased eruptive activity about 60,000 years ago. The second oldest is Mauna Kea, which last erupted about 3,000 years ago; next is Hualalai, which has had only one historic eruption (1800-1801), and, lastly, both Mauna Loa and Kilauea have been vigorously and repeatedly active in historic times. Because it is growing on the southeastern flank of Mauna Loa, Kilauea is believed to be younger than its huge neighbor. The size of the Hawaiian hot spot is not known precisely, but it presumably is large enough to encompass the currently active volcanoes of Mauna Loa, Kilauea, Loihi and, possibly, also Hualalai and Haleakala. Some scientists have estimated the Hawaiian hot spot to be about 200 miles across, with much narrower vertical passageways that feed magma to the individual volcanoes. 
Hawaiian Eruptions in Recorded History
Hawaii has a brief written history, extending back only about 200 years, compared to such volcanic regions as Iceland, Indonesia, Italy, and Japan. Written accounts exist for most Hawaiian eruptions since 1820, when the first American missionaries settled in Hawaii. Descriptions of earlier eruptions are sketchier, because they are based only on interpretations of ancient Hawaiian chants and stories told by Hawaiian elders and early European residents to the American missionaries. All the known historic Hawaiian eruptions have been at Mauna Loa and Kilauea Volcanoes except for the following: the 1790? (year uncertain) eruption of Haleakala Volcano on Maui, and the 1800-1801 eruption of Hualalai Volcano, on the west coast of the Big Island. Although an exception to the overall northwest-southeast shift of volcanic activity, a series of submarine eruptions also probably occurred in 1955-56 between the islands of Oahu and Kauai and near Necker Island, about 350 miles northwest of Kauai.  On March 30, 1984, both Kilauea and Mauna Loa were in simultaneous eruption, the first time since 1924. Kilauea's Pu'u 'O'o eruption began its 17th high-fountaining episode since January 1983 (above photograph by Kepa Maly, National Park Service) and a Mauna Loa eruption, which began on March 25, continued to feed a major lava flow that advanced toward the city of Hilo (bottom photograph by Scott Lopez, National Park Service.)Graph summarizing the eruptions of Mauna Loa and Kilauea Volcanoes in recorded history. Information is sketchy for historic eruptions before 1820, when the first American missionaries arrived in Hawaii. The total duration of eruptive activity in a given year, shown by the vertical bar, may be for a single eruption or combined for several separate eruptions. The active lava lake within Halemaumau Crater overflowing its levee, as painted by D. Howard Hitchcock in 1894. (Photograph by J.D. Griggs with permission of the Volcano House Hotel, owner of the original painting.)  For the past 200 years, Mauna Loa and Kilauea have tended to erupt on average every two or three years, placing them among the most frequently active volcanoes of the world. Some intervals of repose between eruptions at a given volcano have been much longer than its long-term average. The individual Kilauea eruptions recorded historically are in addition to the nearly continuous eruptive activity within or near Halemaumau Crater, extending throughout the 19th century and into the early 20th century. Simultaneous eruption of both volcanoes has been rare except at times when Kilauea was continuously active before 1924. The only post-1924 occurrence of simultaneous eruption was in March 1984, when activity at both volcanoes overlapped for one day. Long repose intervals for one volcano correlate approximately with increased activity at the other. This general relation is imperfect but holds well for post-1924 eruptive activity. Between 1934 and 1952, only Mauna Loa was active and, between 1952 and 1974, only Kilauea was. Since July 1950, Hawaiian eruptive activity has been dominated by frequent and sometimes prolonged eruptions at Kilauea, while only two short-lived eruptions have occurred at Mauna Loa (July 1975 and March-April 1984). As of September 1986, Kilauea's eruption at Pu'u 'O'o, which began in January 1983, shows no signs of decline. Except for the nearly continuous eruptive activity at Halemaumau for a century before 1924, and at Mauna Loa summit between 1872 and 1877, the Pu'u 'O'o eruption has now become the longest lasting single Hawaiian eruption in recorded history. A pattern of alternating dominant activity between Mauna Loa and Kilauea could imply that both volcanoes may alternately tap the same deep magma source. Whether this is so is a topic of scientific debate, because abundant chemical and physical evidence indicates that each volcano has its own shallow magma reservoir that operates independently of the other. The average volume of lava erupted at Kilauea Volcano since 1956 is between 110 and 130 million cubic yards per year. In contrast, the average rate of lava output along the entire Hawaiian-Emperor Chain during its 70-million-year life is only about 20 million cubic yards per year. For reasons not yet understood, the rate of eruptive activity associated with the Hawaiian hot spot for the past few centuries appears exceptionally high relative to its long-term average. Brief high-fountaining episodes (shown by bars) alternated with longer intervals of low-level activity during the Pu'u 'O'o eruption. Width of bar indicates duration of high fountaining. 
Volcano Monitoring and Research.
Before the 20th century, most scientific studies of volcanoes were conducted during short-lived expeditions, generally undertaken as a response to major eruptions. Thomas A. Jaggar, Jr., a geologist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), was not satisfied with that approach. He recognized that, to understand volcanoes fully, one must study them continuously before, during, and after eruptions. Jaggar's views were profoundly affected by a memorable visit in 1902 to the Island of Martinique (West Indies). He went as a member of the scientific expedition sent to study the catastrophic eruption of Mont Pelee that year, which devastated the city of St. Pierre and killed about 30,000 people. In 1911, spurred by a stimulating lecture delivered by Jaggar, a group of Hawaiian residents founded the Hawaiian Volcano Research Association (HVRA). The logo of the HVRA included the motto Ne plus haustae aut obrutae urbes (No more shall the cities be destroyed), reflecting Jaggar's memory of Mont Pelee's destructive force and his optimistic belief that better understanding of volcanoes could reduce the hazard to life and property from eruptions. In 1912, with support from the HVRA and the Whitney Fund of MIT, Jaggar established the Hawaiian Volcano Observatory (HVO) to study the activity of Mauna Loa and Kilauea Volcanoes on a permanent, scientific basis. "Volcanology" emerged as a modern science with the founding of the HVO, which between 1912 and 1948 was managed by the HVRA, the U.S. Weather Bureau, the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS), and the National Park Service.  Above: The first Hawaiian Volcano Observatory (HVO), located near the site of the present Volcano House Hotel, as it appeared around 1922. (Photographer unknown; courtesy of the Bishop Museum, Honolulu, Hawaii.) Below: HVO at its present site, after the addition of a new wing (with observation tower) and renovation in 1986. (Photograph by J.D. Griggs.) Since 1948, it has been operated by the USGS. During the past 75 years of research, HVO scientists have developed and refined most of the surveillance techniques now commonly employed by volcano observatories worldwide. Volcano monitoring.
The term volcano monitoring refers to the observations and measurements scientists make to document changes in the state of the volcano during and between eruptions. Such changes are now well known for Kilauea, and a pattern of similar changes is becoming apparent for the less studied Mauna Loa. As magma enters the shallow summit reservoir, the volcano undergoes swelling or inflation (a process similar to the stretching of a balloon being filled with air). This swelling in turn causes changes in the shape of the volcano's surface. During inflation, the slope or tilt of the volcano increases, and reference points (benchmarks) on the volcano are uplifted relative to a stable point and move farther apart from one another. For Hawaiian volcanoes, pre-eruption inflation generally is slow and gradual, lasting for weeks to years. However, once eruption begins, the shrinking or deflation of the volcano typically occurs rapidly as pressure on the magma reservoir is relieved -- a process not unlike deflating a balloon. During deflation, changes in tilt and in vertical horizontal distances between benchmarks are opposite to those during inflation.  Hypothetical cross section of Kilauea Volcano. Magma entering the shallow reservoir exerts pressure on the volcano, causing earthquakes and distorting its shape from the dotted-line profile to the sold-line profile. During inflation, reference points (benchmarks) on the volcano's surface are pushed upward and outward relative to points assumed to be stable. The changes in the volcano's shape and the occurrence of the earthquakes can be tracked precisely by volcano- monitoring techniques. Hawaiian Volcano Observatory (HVO) scientist using laser-ranging instrument (left) to make electronic- distance measurement (EDM). (Photograph by Cristina Heliker.) The laser beam is reflected back to the EDM instrument by a cluster of retro-reflectors (right), and a precise determination of the horizontal measurement is made by a small computer within the instrument. (Photograph by Robin T. Holcomb.)HVO scientists using an optical-level instrument to determine ground tilt, calculated from readings to three or more stadia rods (one seen at right). Use of umbrella improves readings by eliminating disruptive air-temperature fluctuations caused by passage of clouds. (Photograph by J.D. Griggs). Changes in the shape of the volcano during inflation and deflation are determined by ground-deformation measurements. Tilt changes can be measured continuously and extremely precisely by use of instruments called tiltmeters, which can detect a change in angle of less than 1 microradian (about 0.00006 degree). A 1-microradian increase in tilt would be equivalent to steepening the slope of a 1-mile-long board by placing a nickel under one end. Tilt changes and associated relative vertical displacements also can be detected by periodic remeasurement of arrays of benchmarks by leveling, a high-precision field surveying method. Changes in horizontal distances between benchmarks can be monitored in the field by using portable electronic distance measurement (EDM) instruments that utilize laser or infra-red beams. Collectively, these commonly used ground-deformation monitoring techniques have a measurement precision of a few parts per million or less. The notion of one part per million can be visualized in terms of a very dry martini -- 1 drop of vermouth in 16 gallons of gin!  The mainstay of volcano monitoring is the continuous recording of seismic activity. Virtually all Hawaiian eruptions are preceded and accompanied by an increase in the number of shallow earthquakes. As magma moves into the reservoir during inflation, it must make room for itself by rupturing or crowding aside the solidified lava that surrounds the reservoir. Such underground ruptures produce seismic waves that travel through the volcano and are recorded by a network of seismometers placed on the volcano's surface. Ground motions sensed by the seismometer are converted into electronic signals, which are transmitted by radio and are recorded on seismographs located at the volcano observatory. The seismic data are analyzed to determine the time, location, depth, and magnitude of the earthquakes. Mapping the earthquake activity allows HVO scientists to track the subsurface movement of magma. All Hawaiian eruptions are accompanied by harmonic tremor (also called volcanic tremor). Quite distinct from the discrete seismic shocks associated with rupture-caused earthquakes, harmonic tremor is a continuous vibration of the ground caused by magma movement. Harmonic tremor generally is detectable and recorded only by seismic instrumentation; however, if especially vigorous, tremor can be felt by people as far as 5 miles from the eruption site. Above left: A smoke-drum seismograph. A sharp-needle pen "writes" the seismic signature by scratching recording paper coated with carbon black (soot). (Photograph by Robert W. Decker.)For more precise monitoring, however, HVO records and analyzes seismic activity by use of photographic-film and computerized magnetic-tape recording systems. Above right: Examples of common seismic signatures typically recorded before and during eruptions. 
Anatomy of an eruption: The inflation-deflation cycle.
Kilauea's behavior during and between eruptions is remarkably regular. Monitoring instruments placed at the volcano's summit can used to trace the cycles of gradual inflation, in which the reservoir fills with magma, and abrupt deflation when the reservoir partially empties to deliver magma to an eruption. These recurring inflation- deflation cycles are precisely recorded by tiltmeters and seismometers, as well displayed during the 1983-to-present Pu'u 'O'o eruption. During inflation the rocks surrounding the reservoir become stressed, and this stress is partly relieved by increasing numbers of earthquakes, too small to be felt, but easily recorded by seismometers at Kilauea summit. These earthquakes (called short- period or tectonic) are recorded as high- frequency features on a seismograph. During deflation the stress is completely relieved. The short-period earthquakes stop, but their place is taken by low-frequency earthquakes (called long-period or volcanic), which reflect adjustments related to the exit of magma from the summit reservoir to feed the eruption. The long-period earthquakes are related to harmonic tremor, the continuous seismic record of underground magma movement. Kilauea's distinctive inflation-deflation pattern is seen for nearly every eruption, regardless of the amount of tilt change observed. For example, the pattern is dramatically shown for the Kilauea Iki eruption in 1959, which involved the largest tilt change observed to date (nearly 300 microradians); the same pattern is also well shown for activity involving tilt changes of only 20 microradians or less, such as the continuing eruption at Pu'u 'O'o. 
Forecasting eruptions.
A prime objective of volcano monitoring is to detect the early signs of possible eruptive activity and to make reliable eruption forecasts. Although considerable advances have been made in volcano monitoring in Hawaii, accurate long-term forecasts (one year or longer) still elude scientists. However, the capability for short-term forecasts (hours to months), especially of Kilauea's activity, is much better. Accurate short-term forecasts of Hawaiian eruptions are based primarily on analyses of inflation-deflation patterns, made possible through decades of study of ground deformation (tilt) and seismicity (earthquakes and harmonic tremor). When the level of inflation and the short-period earthquake counts are high, the volcano is ready to erupt. Sometimes there is~ a delay of days or even weeks before eruption occurs, but scientists can be ready to study the activity when it occurs. Eruption is signaled by the beginning of sharp deflation accompanied by either harmonic tremor or earthquakes close to the site of eruptive outbreak. These signals are usually seen an hour to several hours before lava breaks the surface and allow scientists enough time to travel to the likely site of activity. Above: The common pattern of gradual inflation, followed by abrupt deflation, is well demonstrated by major eruptions and intrusions. Below: Detailed look at a 6-month segment of the tilt record reveals similar inflation-deflation patterns for the high-lava fountaining episodes of Pu'u 'O'o eruption, even though the tilt changes and time intervals involved are much smaller (compare scales of the two drawings). Also well shown are the variation patterns of the two types of earthquakes that commonly precede and accompany Kilauea eruptions. The principal volcano- monitoring networks operated by the Hawaiian Volcano Observatory. For more information about these networks, see article by Heliker and others (Selected Readings) The combination of seismic and ground- deformation monitoring has proved to be the most useful and liable technique in the short-term forecasting of eruptions at Kilauea. Some experimental techniques being developed or tested show promise and should increase forecasting capabilities in the future. These new methods include monitoring the changes in: the composition and amount of volcanic gases discharged (such as sulfur dioxide, carbon dioxide, hydrogen, helium, and radon); the magnetic and gravitational fields of the volcano; and the various geoelectrical properties of the volcano. So far, the data from these experimental techniques have not given definitive precursors to possible eruptions. How- ever, they have identified underground movement of magma from one place to another, sometimes unaccompanied by measurable ground deformation or earthquakes. Experience on well-studied active volcanoes in Hawaii and elsewhere has shown that the best monitoring is achieved by using a combination of approaches rather than relying on any single method. At present, scientists generally can identify the increased potential for eruption of Kilauea or Mauna Loa and the likely location of the outbreak, but they cannot make specific forecasts of the exact timing or size of the expected eruption. However, for a number of Kilauea eruptions in recent decades, the HVO staff has been able to provide advice to officials of Hawaii Volcanoes National Park, hours to days in advance, to evacuate certain areas of the park and to station observers at or near the eruption site. Scientist using a correlation spectrometer (COSPEC) to measure the emission of sulfur dioxide gas from the Pu'u 'O'o vent. This instrument was originally developed to measure the discharge of sulfur dioxide from industrial smokestacks in monitoring atmospheric pollution. (Photograph by J.D. Griggs.)  
Kilauea's Volcanic "Plumbing System".
From years of monitoring and research at HVO, Kilauea's volcanic "plumbing system" is now relatively well understood. This system links the processes involved in the formation, transport, storage, and, ultimately, eruption of magma to build and feed Hawaii's active volcanoes. Kilauea's plumbing system is believed to extend deep beneath the Earth's surface, where basaltic magma is generated by partial melting of material beneath the Pacific Plate as it passes over the Hawaiian hot spot. This belief is based on the persistent recurrence of earthquakes 30 or more miles beneath Hawaii. Earthquakes occurring in the depth interval 20-30 miles are probably related to the accumulation and upward movement of magma. Seismic data for levels shallower than 20 miles can be interpreted to define diffuse zones of continuous magma rise, one leading to Kilauea and another to Mauna Loa. Before Kilauea eruptions, most of the magma entering the volcano is stored temporarily within a shallow reservoir. Earthquake data and ground-deformation patterns suggest that this reservoir is located 1 to 4 miles beneath the summit and consists of pockets of magma concentrated within a crudely spherical volume about 3 miles across. Earthquakes do not occur within the reservoir, because liquid magma does not rupture to generate and transmit certain seismic waves. Kilauea eruptions occur either at its summit or within two well-defined swaths (called rift zones) that radiate from the summit. During summit eruptions, the magma reservoir deflates only slightly, if at all. This relation implies that the rate at which magma is erupted nearly equals that at which the reservoir is refilled by new magma from depth. During an eruption in a rift zone, called a rift or flank eruption, however, the summit region undergoes a significant and abrupt deflation as magma moves quickly from the summit reservoir into the rift zone. Similar summit deflation occurs during a rift intrusion, during which magma injected into the rift zone remains stored there rather than breaking the ground surface in an eruption. When the rift eruption or intrusion ends, the summit region reinflates as the shallow reservoir is refilled by magma from depth. Small pockets of summit-fed magma may be stored for a while within a rift zone and form transient secondary reservoirs. The volcanic plumbing system for Mauna Loa is less well known. Analysis of data from the well monitored 1975 and 1984 eruptions, however, suggests that the essential features of Kilauea's plumbing system are shared by Mauna Loa, despite the difference in size between the two volcanoes. Mauna Loa's magma reservoir also may be larger than Kilauea's, which would be consistent with the observations that Mauna Loa eruptions tend to be characterized by higher lava-output rates, longer eruptive fissures, and larger lava flows. Cut-away view looking deep beneath Kilauea Volcano, showing the shallow magma reservoir and the principal magma passageways. Areas in yellow are the most favorable zones for magma movement (arrows show direction) and storage. Though greatly generalized, this depiction of Kilauea's "plumbing system" is compatible with all known scientific information. (Figure by Michael P. Ryan, simplified from his technical illustrations in USGS Professional Paper 1350, Volume 2, Chapter 52.) 
Eruptive Style: Powerful but Usually Benign.
By definition, the adjective eruptive describes any object or phenomenon associated with processes of "bursting forth," "breaking out," or "issuing forth suddenly and violently." Strictly speaking, no eruption is truly nonexplosive, but most Hawaiian eruptions closely approach being such. Indeed, the term "Hawaiian" is used by volcanologists worldwide to characterize similar eruptive style at other volcanoes. 
Typical activity: "nonexplosive" or weakly explosive.
With infrequent exceptions, eruptions of Hawaiian volcanoes are weakly explosive or nonexplosive and relatively benign. Hawaiian eruptions are typically gentle because their lava is highly fluid and thus tends to flow freely both beneath the surface and upon eruption. In contrast, lava of volcanoes located along plate margins, such as Mount St. Helens, generally is more viscous ("stickier" and "stiffer") and tends to fragment, often very explosively, during eruption. Highly fluid lava favors the nonviolent release of the expanding volcanic gases that drive eruptions. In contrast, viscous magma suppresses easy gas escape, which results in pressure build-up underground and ultimately in explosive gas release and magma fragmentation. Lava viscosity ("stiffness" or "resistance to flow") is largely determined by the chemical composition and temperature of the magma, the amount of crystals in the magma, and the gas content. The high fluidity (low viscosity) of Hawaiian lavas derives mainly from its basaltic composition, characterized by more iron (Fe), magnesium (Mg), calcium (Ca), and titanium (Ti), and less silicon (Si), aluminum (Al), sodium (Na), and potassium (K), compared to such viscous lavas as the dacite erupted explosively at Mount St. Helens in 1980. In the graph showing this compositional difference between Hawaiian basalt and Mount St. Helens dacite, the chemical elements are given as oxides [(for example, calcium as calcium oxide (CaO)]. Basalt is dark volcanic rock made up of small crystals and glass, whereas dacite, while also glassy or fine-grained, generally is much lighter in color. Hawaiian eruptions typically start with lava fountains spouting from a series of nearly continuous fissures, "curtain(s) of fire." As most eruptions progress, lava-fountain activity becomes localized at a single vent (an opening from which lava issues), generally within hours of the initial outbreak. Depending on the shape of the vent and other eruptive conditions, lava fountains can vary widely in form, size, and duration. Left: Mount St. Helens, a typical steep-sided composite volcano, shortly before its decapitation by the May eruption in 1980. (Photograph courtesy of D.R. Pevear, Western Washington University, Bellingham.) Right: Mauna Loa, an excellent example of a shield volcano, viewed from the Hawaiian Volcano Observatory. (Photograph by Robert I. Tilling.).Above: Graph illustrating the difference in average chemical compositions between lava erupted by Hawaiian volcanoes and by Mount St. Helens in 1980. The number given for each chemical element gives the amount (in weight percent) of that element (expressed as oxide) contained in the lava. Left: Note the contrast in color and texture between Hawaiian basalt (dark) and Mount St. Helens dacite (light). (Photograph by J.D. Griggs).Lava fountains can vary widely in size and form. Center: 1,900-foot high fountain during Kilauea Iki eruption in 1959, the highest ever observed anywhere in the world. (Photograph courtesy of the National Park Service.) Right above: A discontinuous row of lava fountains ("curtains of fire") 50-100 feet high during the 1971 Kilauea summit eruption as viewed from the air. (Photograph courtesy of the National Park Service.) Right below: "Curtain of fire" viewed from the ground during the 1984 Mauna Loa eruption. (Photograph by Richard B. Moore.) Left: Night view (time-exposure) of a "spray" lava fountain, 50-70 feet high, during the 1972-74 Mauna Ulu eruption of Kilauea. (Photograph by Robin T. Holcomb.) Top: A 40-foot arching "hose" fountain spurts from Pu'u 'O'o vent in 1983. (Photograph by J.D. Griggs.) Bottom: A "dome" fountain, about 45 feet high, plays continuously for hours during the 1969-71 Mauna Ulu eruption. (Photograph by Jeffrey B. Judd.)Red-hot blobs of liquid lava ejected during one of the high-fountaining episodes at Pu'u 'O'o are transformed to solid black fragments upon rapid cooling in flight. Helicopter (upper left) gives scale. (Photograph by J.D. Griggs.) During the 1959 Kilauea Iki eruption, lava fountains shot 1,900 feet, the record height for historic Hawaiian eruptions and likely the highest lava fountain yet observed on Earth. More recently, some of the vigorous eruptive episodes of the 1983-to-present Pu'u 'O'o activity have produced lava fountains about 1,500 feet high. Though impressive, even these spectacularly high lava fountains are products of relatively weak explosive activity. By comparison, the May 1980 explosive eruption of Mount St. Helens sent ash more than 12 miles into the atmosphere. When the rate of gas release is too low to cause fountaining, lava merely wells up, flows quietly, or oozes from the vent. Lava falling from fountains and issuing quietly from vents often forms incandescent lava streams or lava flows, leading to the colorful term "rivers of fire," often used in popular accounts of Hawaiian eruptions. During some Mauna Loa eruptions, several lava flows rushed down the steep slopes at 35 miles per hour! During long-lived eruptions, lava flows tend to become "channeled" into a few main streams. Overflows of lava from these streams solidify quickly and plaster on to the channel walls, building natural levees or ramparts that allow the level of the lava to be raised. Lava streams that flow steadily in a confined channel for many hours to days may develop a solid crust or roof and thus change gradually into streams within lava tubes. Because the walls and roofs of such tubes are good thermal insulators, lava flowing through them can remain hot and fluid much longer than surface flows. Tube-fed lava can be transported for great distances from the eruption sites. For example, during the 1969-74 Mauna Ulu eruptions at Kilauea, lava flows traveled underground through a lava-tube system more than 7 miles long to enter the ocean on five occasions. Center: Aerial view of braided lava flow of the 1984 Mauna Loa eruption. With imagination, some people see in this flow pattern the figure of Pele, Goddess of Volcanoes, with her arms raised. (Photograph by Maurice Krafft, Centre de Volcanologie, Cernay, France.) Above right: Inside the Thurston Lava Tube, Hawaii Volcanoes National Park. (Photo- graph by Taeko Jane Takahashi.) Below right: How Thurston Lava Tube might have looked when it was "active" a few hundred years ago can be appreciated from this view through the collapsed roof ("skylight") of a lava tube active during the 1969-71 Mauna Ulu eruption. (Photograph by Jeffrey B. Judd.)Right: Lava cascades plunge 160 feet into Lua Hou Crater, upper part of Mauna Loa's southwest rift zone, during July 1975 eruption. (Photograph by Robin T. Holcomb.) Below: A clockwise-circulating lava lake (nearly 500 feet across) in Pauahi's west pit formed during the same eruption. Bright small spots seen on the lake surface are caused by trees bursting into flame. (Photograph by Robert I. Tilling.) Lava streams that plunge over cliffs or the steep walls of craters form impressive lava cascades or lava falls. Where cascades spill into preexisting craters, lava lakes may be formed. Such lakes are considered inactive and generally form a solid crust within hours or a few days. The still molten lava beneath this crust then takes weeks to years, depending on lake size, to cool and solidify completely. Lava lakes formed at the site of, and sustained by, active eruptive vents are considered active. The crust formed on these lakes is not permanent and breaks up in response to circulation and sloshing of the underlying molten lava. Repeated overflows from active lava lakes raise their level by rampart construction similar to overflowing lava streams. By this process of levee growth, lakes may become perched many feet above their surroundings. Surface movements of the active lava lake within Mauna Ulu crater in 1971 provide an instructive, but very small scale, analogy to movements of the Earth's tectonic plates. Left: View looking east and down (about 200 feet) at the lava-lake surface. Center: Closer view of moving slabs of solidified crust, ranging in size from a few feet to several tens of feet across but only a few inches thick, rafted by circulating lava beneath. Right: Even closer views of lake surface to show small-scale analogs to the three common types of boundaries between tectonic plates: Convergent boundary between two slabs of crust (upper); Divergent or spreading boundaries between three slabs (middle); and Transform fault (lower) offsetting the spreading boundary between two slabs. (Photographs by Wendell A. Duffield.) The century-long lava-lake activity at Halemaumau ceased after the explosive 1924 eruption; however, a lava lake was active there for about 8 months during the 1967-68 eruption. Not until the 1969-1974 Mauna Ulu eruptions, on Kilauea's upper east rift zone, however, did scientists have an opportunity to observe the development and behavior of a long-lived active lava lake outside the summit region of a Hawaiian volcano. The lava-lake behavior at Mauna Ulu, including movement and collision of thin plates of surface crust floating on circulating molten lava, provided a small-scale version of the Earth's global plate tectonics. This footprint and others preserved in the muddy ash deposits of Kilauea's explosive eruption in 1790 are believed to be those of Hawaiians who survived the hot explosion cloud. (Photograph by James F. Martin, National Park Service.)
Infrequent explosive activity.
Explosive eruptions that deposit large volumes of pyroclastic debris over large areas -- like the May 1980 eruption of Mount St. Helens -- are rare at Hawaiian volcanoes. The term "pyroclastic" -- derived from Greek pyro (fire) and klastos (broken) -- is a general term to describe all types of fragmented new magma or old solid rock ejected during explosive eruptions. Less than 1 percent of Hawaiian eruptions have been violently explosive, based on the scarcity of pyroclastic deposits. In contrast, some volcanic chains formed along the convergent boundaries of the Earth's tectonic plates contain 90 percent or more pyroclastic material. In 1790, a series of major explosive eruptions, which probably lasted a few days to a few weeks, deposited a blanket of pyroclastic debris up to 30 feet thick in and around Kilauea summit. At the time of these eruptions, a band of about 250 Hawaiian warriors, led by Keoua, chief of the Puna district in eastern Hawaii, was marching across the summit region of Kilauea to battle the army of a rival chief, Kamehameha. Some of Keoua's warriors were caught in a hot, high-velocity explosion cloud, composed mainly of volcanic steam and gases but little ash. The hot gases seared the warriors' lungs, killing about 80 of them by suffocation. Footprints preserved in the muddy ash deposits of the 1790 eruption are thought to be those of the surviving warriors; these still can be seen by hiking the Mauna Iki (Footprints) Trail in Hawaii Volcanoes National Park. Had the Hawaiian Volcano Observatory been at its present location on the summit of Kilauea in 1790, it almost certainly would have been destroyed. A much less energetic explosive eruption took place at Halemaumau Crater in May 1924. Three months before the eruption, the long-lived lava lake in Halemaumau played actively about 150 feet below the crater rim. Beginning in February, the lake surface began to drop rapidly, and soon the lake drained entirely to expose the crater floor. Throughout March and April, the crater floor further subsided, apparently in response to magma moving from the summit reservoir into the east rift zone. By May 6, Halemaumau's floor was more than 600 feet below the rim.  Tourists posing in May 1924 (at a safe distance!) at Kilauea Volcano as a large explosion cloud rises thousands of feet into the air. (Photograph courtesy of the Bishop Museum.)A series of steam explosions began on May 10 at Halemaumau and continued vigorously for two and a half weeks. Each explosion lasted from a few minutes to 7 hours; the most powerful ones sent ash plumes more than a mile high and hurled large blocks, some weighing several tons, more than a half mile from Halemaumau. Many of these blocks were red hot. A photographer, who ventured too close to the crater, was struck by a falling block and died the next day from his injuries. When the explosions ended, Halemaumau was about twice as wide, and eight times as deep, as before the eruption. The 1790 and 1924 eruptions were explosive because they involved the violent mixing of ground water and magma or hot rocks. During both eruptions, as the magma column subsided in the vent, ground water came into sudden contact with hot material and flashed explosively to steam. The 1924 eruption ejected only chunks of solid, hot older rocks; none was newly formed from magma. The 1790 eruption expelled fragments of solid, older rocks and new magmatic material, suggesting that ground water mixed with both. Though impressive, the 1924 explosions produced only about one-tenth of 1 Percent of the volume of the 1790 explosions. Center: Molten lava being shredded by littoral explosions upon entry into the ocean during the1969-71 Mauna Ulu eruption. (Photograph by Donald W. Peterson.) Right above: Pu'u o Mahana, a prehistoric littoral cone of Mauna Loa, is the site of the Big Island's green-sand beach. (Photograph by J.D. Griggs.) Right below: Close-up of the green sand, which obtains its color from wave- concentrated grains of the green mineral olivine. (Photograph by Robert I. Tilling.) The pyroclastic deposits exposed at Kilauea indicate that about two dozen major explosive eruptions have occurred during the past 70,000 years. Mauna Loa apparently has had less frequent explosive eruptions during the same time interval. Judging by their distribution and thickness, Kilauea's prehistoric pyroclastic deposits had to be produced by explosive eruptions at least as powerful as the 1790 eruption and, in some cases, several times stronger. A special type of explosive activity, called a littoral explosion, occasionally results when lava flows enter the ocean. Seawater comes into contact with the hot inner part of the lava flow and flashes into steam, triggering an explosive spray of fragments derived from both the solidified outer part of the lava flow as well as its still-molten core. Because of their seashore locations, most small deposits from littoral explosions are quickly removed by erosive action of the ocean surf. Larger deposits, however, are more permanent and form littoral cones, such as the 100-foot-high Pu'u o Mahana, near the south tip of the Big Island, formed during a prehistoric Mauna Loa eruption. Pu'u o Mahana is the site of Hawaii's famous "green sand beach," composed of the shiny green mineral olivine (a magnesium-iron-silicate) eroded from the littoral cone and concentrated by wave action. The conspicuous occurrence of olivine, sometimes also called "Hawaiian diamond," in the pyroclastic deposits that form the prominent cone that is Honolulu's landmark reportedly prompted early visitors to name it "Diamond Head." Peridot, a gem-quality variety of olivine, is the birthstone for the month of August. 
Hawaiian Volcanic Products, Landforms, and Structures.
The volcanic mountains of Hawaii have been built by the accumulation of basalt flows erupted over hundreds of thousands of years, as the Pacific Plate moved northwestward over the hot spot. In contrast, the volcanic mountains in the zones where tectonic plates converge, such as Mount St. Helens and the other volcanoes of the Cascade Range, have been built primarily by pyroclastic debris. Even though they both form linear mountain ranges, the Hawaiian volcanoes differ greatly from the Cascade volcanoes in mode of origin and types of volcanic rocks. Molten lava can solidify in a variety of ways, depending on eruption conditions and gas content of the erupting magma. Volcanic products of Hawaiian eruptions are mostly dark in color but vary widely in form and texture. 
Lava flows.
Lava flows form more than 99 percent of the above-sea parts of Hawaiian volcanoes. Pahoehoe (pronounced "pah-hoy-hoy") and aa (pronounced "ah-ah") are the two main types of Hawaiian lava flows, and these two Hawaiian names, introduced into the scientific literature in the late 19th century, are now used by volcanologists worldwide to describe similar lava-flow types. Pahoehoe is lava that in solidified form is characterized by a smooth, billowy, or ropy surface, while aa is lava that has a rough, jagged, spiny, and generally clinkery surface. In thick aa flows, the rubbly surface of loose clinkers and blocks hides a massive, relatively dense interior. Center: An active clinkery aa lava flow advances over the smooth surface of earlier erupted pahoehoe lava during the 1972-74 Mauna Ulu eruption. (Photograph by Robert I. Tilling.) Right: Closer views of the surface of an aa flow (above) and a pahoehoe flow (below). (Photographs by J.D. Griggs and Taeko Jane Takahashi, respectively.)  Below: SCUBA-diving scientist's view of incandescent lava breaking through the solidified shell of a pillow-lava lobe to form another tongue as underwater flow advances during the 1969-71 Mauna Ulu eruption. (Photograph by Richard Grigg, University of Hawaii.)Right: Pillow lava on the submerged western slope of Mauna Loa at a water depth of about 2,500 feet. The research submarine's mechanic alarm (right) can be manipulated by scientists on board to collect samples. (Photograph by Daniel Fornari, Lamont-Doherty Geological Observatory of Columbia University.)  The contrast between the surfaces of pahoehoe and aa flows is immediately obvious to anyone hiking Hawaiian lava fields. Walking on dense pahoehoe can almost be as easy as strolling on a paved sidewalk. But walking across aa is like scrambling over a building-demolition site or battle zone, strewn with loose, unstable debris of all shapes and sizes. The jagged rubble of aa flows quickly destroys field boots and, should the hiker stumble or fall (not at all uncommon), it can tear clothing and flesh. Many Hawaiian lava flows solidify as pahoehoe throughout their extent, and a few flows solidify completely as aa. Most flows, however, consist of both pahoehoe and aa in widely varying proportions. In a given flow, pahoehoe upstream commonly changes to aa downstream, but aa lava flows do not change into pahoehoe flows. The explanation for this oneway change lies in the delicate balance between the initial gas content of the lava, the changes in lava viscosity, and the rate of deformation ("shear strain") of the lava during flow and cooling. Once this critical balance is upset, pahoehoe can change to aa. Hawaiian lava is fluid enough to travel great distances, especially if it is transported through lava tubes. Some historic flows are longer than 30 miles; in general, pahoehoe flows tend to be longer than aa. Lava tubes may be preserved when the eruption ends and the lava drains away to leave open tunnels. They may be as much as several tens of feet in diameter, and some have been followed by spelunkers (cave explorers) for nearly 10 miles. Ancient Hawaiians used lava tubes as places of shelter and as burial caves. Visitors to Hawaii Volcanoes National Park can walk through Thurston Lava Tube, which formed in a pahoehoe flow a few hundred years ago. Fluid lava erupted or flowing under water may form a special structure called pillow lava. Such structures form when molten lava breaks through the thin walls of underwater tubes, squeezes out like toothpaste, and quickly solidifies as irregular, tongue-like protrusions. This process is repeated countless times, and the resulting protrusions stack one upon another as the lava flow advances underwater. The term pillow comes from the observation that these stacked protrusions are sack- or pillow-shaped in cross section. Typically ranging from less than a foot to several feel in diameter, each pillow has a glassy outer skin formed by the rapid cooling of the lava by water. Much pillow lava is erupted under relatively high pressure created by the weight of the overlying water; there is little or no explosive interaction between hot lava and cold water. The bulk of the submarine part of a Hawaiian volcano is composed of pillow lavas.  Above: Specimens from the 1965lava lake in Makaopuhi Crater(about 2 miles east of MaunaUlu), sampled by drilling, as seen under the< microscope (field of view about 0.05 inch). The amount and kinds of crystals increase with decreasing temperatures as the lava lake cools.(Photomicrographs by Thomas L.Wright.) Top right: Looking about 400 feet down from the rim of Kilauea Iki Crater to the surface of the lava lake formed in the 1959 eruption and a site of drilling studies (oval).Bottom right : Close-up of drilling operations. HVO scientists wear asbestos gloves in handling hot drilling steel. (Photographs by Robin T. Holcomb.)Abundant studies in recent decades, by remotely controlled deep-sea cameras as well as by small, manned research submarines, demonstrated the widespread occurrence of pillow lavas in areas of submarine volcanism. It was not until 1970, however, that the underwater formation of pillow lava was directly observed. Twice during the 1969-74 Mauna Ulu eruptions of Kilauea, teams of SCUBA-diving scientists watched and filmed pillow lavas being formed as lava flows entered the sea. Well-formed pillows also have been studied on the submarine parts of Kilauea and Mauna Loa, as well as the submerged parts of the 1800-1801 lava flows of Hualalai Volcano off the west coast of Hawaii. Another common lava product is the ponded flow or lava lake, the formation of which has been described earlier in connection with eruptive style of Hawaiian volcanoes. The surface of lava that is ponded is smooth, broken only by polygonal cooling cracks, formed in much the same way as shrinkage cracks in mud that has been dried by the sun. Lava lakes were formed in Alae (1963 and 1968), Makaopuhi (1965), and Kilauea Iki (1959) Craters. The deep lava lake (350 feet) formed during the November-December 1959 eruption at Kilauea Iki is the only one of these still easily visible and accessible. The lava lakes have been investigated in detail because they furnish natural crucibles for study of the cooling, crystallization, and chemical change of basaltic lava. These studies have included drilling holes through the solid crust of the lake to measure temperature and other properties and to sample the still-molten lava in the interior. lo physical terms, the formation of the lava lake's solid crust by cooling can be compared to the formation of a sheet of ice on top of a body of water during a winter freeze. By 1987, all of the still-molten 1959 lava in the interior of the lake at Kilauea Iki will have solidified, although the internal temperature of the lake will remain hundreds of degrees hotter than the surface temperature for many more years. Drilling of lava lakes can be risky. When the Mauna Ulu eruption began on May 24, 1969, a lava flow poured into Alae Crater and quickly buried a drill rig and related equipment before they be could be lifted out by helicopter! A more common risk is posed by the occasional minor steam explosions in the drillholes caused by contact of cooling water with the molten lava. Fragmental volcanic products Fragmental volcanic debris is formed during mildly explosive activity, such as lava fountaining, and, less commonly, during the infrequent violently explosive eruptions, such as during 1790 at Kilauea. Tephra is the general term now used by volcanologists for airborne volcanic ejecta of any size. Historically, however, various terms have been used to describe ejecta of different sizes. Fragmental volcanic products between 0.1 to about 2.5 inches in diameter are called lapilli; material finer than 0.1 inch is called ash. Fragments larger than about 2.5 inches are called blocks if they were ejected in a solid state and volcanic bombs if ejected in semi-solid, or plastic, condition. In a major explosive eruption, most of the pyroclastic debris would consist of lapilli and ash. Volcanic bombs undergo widely varying degrees of aerodynamic shaping, depending on their fluidity, during the flight through the atmosphere. Based on their shapes after they hit the ground, bombs are variously described, in graphic terms, as "spindle or fusiform," "ribbon," "bread-crust," or "cow-dung."  Shiny strands of volcanic glass, called Pele'shair (above) are commonly found downwind from active eruptive vents. Volcanic spatter commonly becomes tightly welded to form mounds around active vents (below). (Photographs by Donald W.Peterson and Richard P. Moore, respectively.)   Another category of ejecta far more common than volcanic bombs is scoria or cinder, which refers to lapilli- or bomb-size irregular fragments of frothy lava. If the cinder contains abundant vesicles (gas-bubble cavities), it is called pumice, which can be light enough to float on water if the vesicles are closed to rapid filling by water. In Hawaii, these fragments share a common mode of origin: all result from sudden chilling of frothy lava from which gases were escaping during fountaining. During the exceptionally high fountaining episodes of some eruptions, such as at Kilauea Iki in 1959 or at Pu'u 'O'o (all episodes, 1983 to present), an extremely vesicular, feathery light pumice, called reticulite or thread-lace scoria, can form and be carried many miles downwind from the high lava fountains. Even though reticulite is the least dense kind of tephra, it does not float on water, because its vesicles are open and interconnected. Consequently, when it falls on water, it becomes easily waterlogged and sinks. Some common Hawaiian fragmental volcanic products (top to bottom): reticulite; Pele's tears; volcanic bombs; and accretionary lapilli, spherical accumulations of volcanic ash, generally formed during violently explosive eruptions. (Top two photographs by J.D. Griggs, bottom two photographs by John P. Lockwood.) If the scoria or pumice clots are sufficiently soft to flatten or splash as they strike the ground, they are called spatter. The still-molten character of spatter fragments can cause them to stick together to form welded spatter or agglutinate. Drops of lava ejected in very fluid condition and solidified in flight can form air-streamlined spherical, dumbbell, and irregular shapes. Drop-shaped lapilli are called Pele's tears, after the Hawaiian Goddess of Volcanoes. In streaming through the air, Pele's tears usually have trailing behind them a thin thread of liquid lava, which is quickly chilled to form a filament of golden brown glass, called Pele's hair. Pele's hair can form thick mats downwind from high lava fountains near a vent; it also can be blown many miles from the vent. Profile of Hawaiian shield volcanoes compared with the profile of Mount Rainier, one of the larger composite volcanoes of the Cascade Range, drawn at the same scale.  
Volcanic landforms and structures.
Hawaiian volcanoes exemplify the common type of volcano called a shield volcano, built by countless outpourings of fluid lava flows that advance great distances from a central summit vent or group of vents. The successive piling up of these flows results in a broad, gently sloping, convex-upward landform, whose profile resembles that of a Roman warrior's shield. The Hawaiian shield volcanoes are the largest mountains on Earth. Mauna Kea Volcano rises 13,796 feet above sea level but extends about 19,700 feet below sea level to meet the deep ocean floor. Its total height is nearly 33,500 feet, considerably higher than the height of the tallest mountain on land, Mount Everest (Chomolungma) in the Himalaya (29,028 feet above sea level). Mauna Loa stands not quite as high as Mauna Kea but is much larger in volume. The profile of the Mauna Loa shield appears smooth, whereas the shield profile of Mauna Kea has a more uneven appearance, reflecting the growth of numerous small cinder cones on its upper slopes after shield formation. In size, composite volcanoes are dwarfed by the Hawaiian shield volcanoes. Aerial view of some of the prominent fissures within the southwest rift zone of Kilauea Volcano. The shiny dark lava was erupted from these fissures in September 1971. (Photograph by J.D.Griggs.) Aerial view from the south of snow-covered Mokuaweoweo, the summit caldera of Mauna Loa Volcano, and several pit craters of its southwest rift zone, Mauna Kea Volcano, which last erupted about 3,000 years ago, can be seen in the distance.(Photograph by Donald W. Peterson.)  Hawaiian and other shield volcanoes characteristically have a broad summit, indented with a caldera, a term commonly used for a large depression of volcanic origin. Most calderas form by collapse because of removal of magma from the volcano's reservoir by eruption and/or intrusion. Kilauea's summit caldera is about 2.5 miles long and 2 miles wide. Mokuaweoweo, the summit caldera complex of Mauna Loa is more elongate, measuring about 3 by 1.5 miles. The terms crater or pit crater are applied to similar but smaller collapse features. Rift zones radiate from the summit calderas of both Mauna Loa and Kilauea and extend down the volcanic flanks into the sea. They are elongate tapering ridges expressed by prominent open fissures, pit craters, cinder and spatter cones, and small volcanic shields. The orientation of rift zones is influenced by the gravitational stresses and buttressing effects of pre-existing neighboring volcanoes. Most Hawaiian eruptions take place either within summit calderas or along rift zones.  Growth profiles of Kilauea's newest volcanic cone, built during the Pu'u 'O'o eruption.  Aerial view of some scarps of the Hilina Fault System, expressed as sharp cliffs on the south flank of Kilauea Volcano. (Photograph by Donald A. Swanson.)  Repeated forceful intrusions of magma into the rift zones of Kilauea have pushed that volcano's south flank southward toward the sea. This seaward movement is readily measurable at rates as high as a few inches per year. Eventually the accumulated sea-ward movement causes the south flank to become unstable, ultimately resulting in a large earthquake. Such earthquakes occur periodically and are accompanied by substantial and sudden movements along faults cutting the south flank (the Hilina Fault System). For example, in response to a magnitude-7.2 earthquake beneath the area on November 29, 1975, points on Kilauea's south flank dropped as much as 11 feet and shifted southward as much as 24 feet. The scarps (steep slopes) of the Hilina faults are well expressed as palis (Hawaiian for cliffs) on Kilauea's south flank. Prolonged eruptions on Kilauea's east rift zone have given scientists unprecedented opportunities to observe the growth of Hawaiian volcanic landforms. The 1969-74 eruptions created two prominent volcanic shields: a symmetrical 397-foot-high mound at Mauna Ulu (Hawaiian for "growing mountain") and, abutting it, a more irregular shield, 328 feet high, over the site of buried Alae Crater. The highest volcanic landform of historic age in Hawaii is the cone being built by the 1983-to-present Pu'u 'O'o eruption. By September 1986, this cone had grown to a height of more than 830 feet. Loihi: Hawaii's Newest Volcano.
Above: A 3-man research submarine, the DSV Sea Cliff, is transported on the stern of its mother ship, the Maxine D. Below: The Sea Cliff being launched for a dive. (Photographs by Daniel Fornari, Lamont-Doherty Geological Observatory of Columbia University.) If the hot-spot theory is correct, the next volcano in the Hawaiian chain should form east or south of the Big Island. Abundant evidence indicates that such a new volcano exists at Loihi, a seamount (or submarine peak) located about 20 miles off the south coast of the Big Island. Loihi rises 10,100 feet above the ocean floor to within 3,100 feet of the water surface. Recent detailed mapping shows Loihi to be similar in form to Kilauea and Mauna Loa. Its relatively flat summit apparently contains a caldera about 3 miles across; two distinct ridges radiating from the summit are probably rift zones. Photographs taken by deep-sea camera show that Loihi's summit area has fresh-appearing, coherent pillow-lava flows and talus blocks. Examination of samples dredged from Loihi indicates that the pillow-lava fragments have fresh glassy crusts, indicative of their recent formation. The exact ages of the sampled Loihi flows are not yet known, but certainly some cannot be more than a few hundred years old. In fact, the occurrence of earthquake swarms at Loihi during 1971- 1972, 1975, and 1984-85 suggests major submarine eruptions or magma intrusions into the upper part of Loihi. Thus, Loihi appears to be a historically active, but as yet submarine, volcano. Seismic data also indicate that the deepest earthquakes beneath Loihi merge with the deep earthquakes beneath neighboring Kilauea. This downward convergence implies that Loihi apparently is tapping the same deep magma supply that Kilauea and Mauna Loa tap. The triangular zone defined by the summits of these three active volcanoes perhaps can be taken to lie over the postulated Hawaiian hot spot. Studies of Loihi provide a unique opportunity to decipher the youthful submarine stage in the formation and evolution of Hawaiian volcanoes. When might the still-growing Loihi emerge above the surface of the Pacific to become Hawaii's newest volcano island? It will almost certainly take several tens of thousands of years, if the growth rate for Loihi is comparable to that of other Hawaiian volcanoes. It is also possible that Loihi will never emerge above sea level and that the next link in the island chain has not yet begun to form.   Above: Map showing the locations of earthquakes that occurred during 1971-72 and 1975 in the vicinity of Loihi. These two earthquake swarms, plus a similar occurrence in 1984-85, provide seismic evidence that Loihi is an active submarine volcano. Left: The flank of Loihi, showing broken pillow lava of a fresh flow, as seen from about 7 feet above the volcano's surface at a water depth of about 4,200 feet. (Photograph by Alexander Malahoff, University of Hawaii.)  It is useful to distinguish between the terms hazards and risks. Evaluation of hazards is based on geologic information only and considers the likelihood of destructive volcanic phenomena and products in a given area; assessment of risks evaluates the likelihood of loss of life and property in the area being considered. Thus, volcanic "risk" increases as the zones defined as hazardous become cultivated, populated, or otherwise developed. Even areas with a very low severity of volcanic hazards may be classified as high risk if they are densely populated. Hazards-zonation maps provide government officials and Night view of the lava flows of the 1984 Mauna Loa eruption with lights of downtown Hilo in foreground. (Photograph by David Little.) Although the typically gentle Hawaiian eruptions pose little danger to people, their lava flows can be highly destructive to populated and cultivated areas. For example, the village of Kapoho was entirely destroyed during the 1960 eruption in the lower east rift zone of Kilauea. More recently, flows from Kilauea's Pu'u 'O'o eruption have covered and destroyed dwellings and house lots in the Royal Gardens subdivision on the volcano's southeastern flank. The outskirts of Hilo, the largest city on the Big Island, with a population of about 40,000, are built in part on the pahoehoe lava flows of the 1881 Mauna Loa eruption. During the March-April 1984 eruption of Mauna Loa, Hilo was threatened. Lava flows advanced nearly 16 miles in about 5 days, and a bright red glow in the sky over the area of the incandescent flows could be seen on clear nights. The citizens and officials of Hilo became increasingly concerned as the eruption continued. Fortunately the flows stopped about 4 miles short of the nearest buildings on the city's outskirts. Because of the frequent eruptions of Kilauea and Mauna Loa, the Hawaiian Volcano Observatory conducts round-the-clock monitoring to detect early signs of impending activity and to advise local officials on a timely basis. A key component in reducing volcanic hazards is the preparation of volcanic-hazards zonation maps. These maps delineate the zones of relative severity of volcanic hazards based on an assessment of data on eruption frequency; nature of expected activity; and likely vent areas and lava-flow paths. the public with critical information that allows them to assess the risks of volcanic hazards and apply the results in long-term land-use planning, estimates of the socioeconomic and political impact of eruptions, and preparation of contingency plans in case of volcanic emergencies. A volcanic-hazards map has been prepared for the Big Island, in which the areas of increasing relative severity of hazards from lava flows are designated "9" through "1." Related maps have been prepared for hazards from air-fall ash, ground failures, and subsidence. Similar volcanic hazards-assessment studies have been made for the islands of Maui and Oahu, although the expected frequency of future eruptions on those islands is much lower. Boundaries drawn between the hazard zones are necessarily gradational and reflect the judgment of experienced volcanologists. Hazards-assessment studies assume that probable future eruptive behavior is most likely to be similar to a given volcano's past behavior. As a volcano's eruptive history becomes better documented by additional studies, the hazards-zonation maps for it need to be revised and updated to reflect the incorporation of new and better information.  Map of the Big Island showing the volcanic hazards from lava flows. Severity of the hazard increases from zone 9 to zone 1. Shaded areas show land covered by historic flows from three of Hawaii's five volcanoes (Hualalai, Mauna Loa, and Kilauea).Pressure testing in 1976 of a geothermal well drilled into Kilauea's lower east rift zone. This well currently produces three megawatts of electricity. (Photograph courtesy of the Hawaii Geothermal Project.)Below: Sugar cane thrives in the fertile volcanic soils derived from products of past Hawaiian eruptions. Mauna Kea Volcano is seen in the distance. (Photograph by Robert I. Tilling.)  
Volcanic benefits.
First of all, the Hawaiian Islands would not exist were it not for volcanic activity. Equally important, many factors that combine to make the islands an attractive place to live or visit depend directly or indirectly on the results of past and present eruptions. Given enough rainfall, areas buried by new lava recover quickly; revegetation can begin less than 1 year after the eruption. Erosion and breakdown of the volcanic material can form fertile soils over periods of tens to thousands of years. These rich soils fostered the agricultural development of the Hawaiian Islands, as represented principally by the sugar, pineapple, coffee, and macadamia nut industries. Some of the volcanic products provide an abundant local source of raw materials for landscaping, housing and construction, and road building. In recent years, volcanic energy has been harnessed by a geothermal power plant on Kilauea's east rift zone; the three megawatts of electricity produced are fed into the grid of the local utility company. Much larger capacity geothermal development is under discussion. Hawaii's majestic volcanic mountains, beautiful beaches, and pleasant climate combine to make the islands a popular tourist attraction, which includes two heavily visited national parks. Haleakala National Park on Maui, founded in 1961, features the spectacularly eroded summit crater of 10,023 foot-high Haleakala Volcano, active as recently as about 1790. Hawaii Volcanoes National Park, created by Congress in 1916, contains the two currently active Hawaiian volcanoes, Mauna Loa and Kilauea. This park is one of the few places in the world where the processes and products of active volcanism can be viewed safely and comfortably by the nonspecialist and volcanologist alike. Indeed, millions of park visitors have experienced "live" the sights, sounds, and smells of volcanic eruptions and gained a firsthand appreciation of the phenomena that created and shaped these beautiful islands.  Benefits of research at the Hawaiian Volcano Observatory.
Hawaii is both a natural laboratory for the study of eruptive phenomena and a volcanic wonderland for visitors. The challenge facing scientists and govern- ment officials is clear: to reduce the adverse impact of eruptions in the short term, so that the residents and tourists in Hawaii can continue to enjoy the long- term benefits of volcanism. Toward this end, the Hawaiian Volcano Observatory (HVO) will continue to give timely warnings of anticipated volcanic activity, reliable and current progress reports on an eruption once it starts, and the best possible technical information on volcanic hazards posed by any eruption, present or future. In addition, the high eruption frequency of its volcanoes and the availability of state-of-the-art research facilities at HVO combine to make Hawaii an excellent training ground for volcanologists from around the world. HVO and other scientists are striving to improve volcano-monitoring and eruption- forecasting techniques, in order to reduce the risks associated with eruptions of active volcanoes in Hawaii and elsewhere. Above: Visitors on the rim of Mauna Ulu crater, silhouetted against the dusky sky (upper right), observe an active lava lake sloshing a few tens of feet below them. Below: Park visitors safely watch spectacular lava cascades and "curtains of fire" during the August 1971 eruption at Kilauea's summit. Photographs courtesy of the National Park Service.) 
Selected Readings.
These works cited furnish additional information on topics not covered, or only briefly discussed, in the booklet. Armstrong, R.W., 1983, editor, Atlas of Hawaii (Second Edition): University of Hawaii Press, Honolulu, 238 p. (A very handy reference volume compiled by the Department of Geography, University of Hawaii, describing the natural, cultural, and social environment of Hawaii, the 50th State.) Brantley, Steven, and Topinka, Lyn, 1984, Volcanic studies at the U.S. Geological Survey's David A. Johnston Cascades Volcano Observatory, Vancouver, Washington: Earthquake Information Bulletin, v. 16, no. 2, p. 41-120. [A well-illustrated report of the activities and workings of the Observatory, which was established in 1981 as a sister volcano observatory to the Hawaiian Volcano Observatory (see Heliker and others, 1986).] Dalrymple, G.B., Silver, E.l., and Jackson, E.D., 1973, Origin of the Hawaiian Islands: American Scientist, v. 61, no. 3, p. 294-308. (One of the best and most readable summaries of the "hotspot" hypothesis for the origin of the Hawaiian Ridge-Emperor Seamount Chain.) Decker, Robert, and Decker, Barbara, 1981, Volcanoes: W.H. Freeman and Company, San Francisco, 244 p. (An information-packed introduction to the study of volcanoes written in an easy-to-read style.) Decker, R.W., Wright, T.L., and Stauffer, P.H., 1987, editors, Volcanism in Hawaii: U.S. Geological Survey Professional Paper 1350, 1,667 p. (This two-volume set represents the most comprehensive collection of multidisciplinary scientific articles on Hawaiian volcanism available to date, containing 65 reports.) Duffield, W.A., 1972, A naturally occurring model of global plate tectonics: Journal of Geophysical Research, v. 77, no. 14, p. 2543-2555. (The first technical article to draw some interesting analogies between the movements of the crust of an active lava lake with much larger scale movements of the Earth's tectonic plates.) Eaton, J.P, and Murata, K.J., 1960, How volcanoes grow: Science, v. 132, p. 925-938. (The classic scientific article that presented the first comprehensive model for the workings of Hawaiian volcanoes, incorporating the results of modern volcano monitoring by the Hawaiian Volcano Observatory.) Editors, 1982, Volcano: in the series Planet Earth, Time-Life Books, Alexandria, Virginia, 176 p. (A well illustrated and readable general survey of volcanoes and their activity.) Heliker, Christina, Griggs, J.D., Takahashi, T.J., and Wright, T.L., 1986, Volcano monitoring at the U.S. Geological Survey's Hawaiian Volcano Observatory: Earthquakes and Volcanoes (formerly Earthquake Information Bulletin), v. 18, no. 1, 72 p. (An informative and richly illustrated article on the monitoring and research activities of the Observatory that was founded in 1912.) Lipman, P.W., and Mullineaux, D.R., editors, 1981, The 1980 eruptions of Mount St. Helens, Washington: U.S. Geological Survey Professional Paper 1250, 844 p. (The most comprehensive collection of scientific articles on Mount St. Helens available to date; it contains 62 reports on many aspects of the 1980 eruptions of this best-known U.S. explosive volcano. This volume provides an instructive comparison with U.S. Geological Survey Professional Paper 1350, edited by Decker and others, which summarizes present knowledge on Hawaiian volcanoes, the best-known U.S. nonexplosive volcanoes.)Macdonald, G.A., Abbott, A.T., and Peterson, F.L., 1983 (Second Edition), Volcanoes in the sea: The geology of Hawaii: University of Hawaii Press, Honolulu, 517 p. (A handsome book that provides the best overview of the eruptive and other geologic processes that have shaped the Hawaiian Islands.) Peck, D.L., Wright, T.L., and Decker, R.W., 1979, The lava lakes of Kilauea: Scientific American, v. 241, no. 4, p.114-128. (An excellent summary of the methods and scientific results of drilling of Kilauea's molten lava lakes, which are natural laboratories for studying the cooling and crystallization of Hawaiian magma.) Tilling, R.l., 1982, Volcanoes: U.S. Geological Survey series of general-interest publications, 46 p. (A general introduction for the nonspecialist to the study of volcanoes, with focus on the nature, types, workings, products, and hazards of volcanoes.) Tilling, R.l., 1984, Monitoring active volcanoes: U.S. Geological Survey series of general-interest publications, 13 p. (A generalized introduction to the common techniques of volcano monitoring, with a brief commentary on some eruptions during the 1975-1982 period, including Mauna Loa, Kilauea, Mount St. Helens, and El Chichon [Mexico].) Tilling, R.l., 1984, Eruptions of Mount St. Helens: Past, present, and future: U.S. Geological Survey series of general-interest publications, 46 p. (A nontechnical summary, illustrated by many color photographs and diagrams, of the abundant scientific data available for the volcano, with emphasis on the catastrophic eruption of May 18, 1980, which caused the worst volcanic disaster in U.S. history.) Westervelt, W.D., 1963, Hawaiian legends of volcanoes: Charles E. Tuttle Company, Rutland, Vermont, 205 p. (An interesting collection of legends and stories about Pele, Hawaiian Goddess of Volcanoes, and her volcanic exploits and deeds.) 
Selected Viewings.
The best way to see Hawaiian eruptive activity is to visit Hawaii Volcanoes National Park -- at the right time and place. The next best thing is to view movies or videos of Hawaiian eruptions, some of which are listed here. Some school and public libraries might have them in their collections. Case History of a Volcano, National Educational Television, Film Service, Indiana University Audio-Visual Center, Bloomington, Indiana 47401. (A presentation of the methods used by scientists of the Hawaiian Volcano Observatory to study Hawaiian volcanoes.) Eruption of Kilauea, 1959-60, Modern Talking Picture Service, Inc., 5000 Park Street North, St. Petersburg, Florida 33709. (This award-winning film contains spectacular footage of the highest lava fountains ever recorded and of the formation of Kilauea Iki lava lake.) Fire Mountain, Encyclopedia Britannica Educational Corporation, 425 North Michigan Avenue, Chicago, Illinois 60611. (Short but excellent film on the 1969-71 Mauna Ulu eruption of Kilauea Volcano.) Fire Under the Sea -- The Origin of Pillow Lava, Moonlight Productions, 2650 California Street, Apt. B, Mountain View, California 94040. (This film features the actual sights and sounds of underwater movement of red-hot lava and formation of pillow lava, as filmed by SCUBA-diving scientists, during the 1969-74 Mauna Ulu eruptions of Kilauea.) Heartbeat of a Volcano, Encyclopedia Britannica Education Corporation, 425 North Michigan Avenue, Chicago, Illinois 60611. (A case study of an eruption of Kilauea Volcano through the eyes of the scientists of the Hawaiian Volcano Observatory; it contains dramatic scenes of active lava tubes.) River of Fire, Hawaii Natural History Association, Ltd., Hawaii Volcanoes National Park, Hawaii 96718. (A video cassette that documents the March-April 1984 eruption of Mauna Loa Volcano and contains some of the best footage of Hawaiian lava flows ever filmed.) The 1955 Eruption of Kilauea Volcano, Hawaiian Islands, Modern Talking Picture Service, Inc., 5000 Park Street North, St. Petersburg, Florida 33709. (A brief film that includes good footage of lava fountains, formation of cinder cones, and advance of lava flows into the Pacific Ocean.) Volcano -- The Birth of a Mountain, Encyclopedia Britannica Educational Corporation, 425 North Michigan Avenue, Chicago, Illinois 60611. (The photographic record of the formation of the 397-foot-high volcanic shield at Mauna Ulu during the 1969-74 eruption of Kilauea; features excellent lava-fountaining and lava-flow scenes.) As the Nation's principal conservation agency, the Department of the Interior has responsibility for most of our nationally owned public lands and natural and cultural resources. This includes fostering sound use of our land and water resources; protecting our fish, wildlife, and biological diversity; preserving the environmental and cultural values of our national parks and historical places; and providing for the enjoyment of life through outdoor recreation. The Department assesses our energy and mineral resources and works to ensure that their development is in the best interests of all our people by encouraging stewardship and citizen participation in their care. The Department also has a major responsibility for American Indian reservation communities and for people who live in island territories under U.S. administration.  The Kona coast, western part of the Island of Hawaii, is well known for its spectacular tropical sunsets.(Photograph by Taeko Jane Takahashi.)
Endnotes.
About the author.
Born in Shanghai, China, Bob Tilling grew up in southern California (near San Diego). He received his BA from Pomona College, and a Ph.D. in geology from Yale University, before joining the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) in 1962. Dr. Tilling has worked as a volcanologist for nearly 25 years, beginning with his assignment in 1972 to the USGS' Hawaiian Volcano Observatory (HVO), becoming its Scientist-in-Charge in 1975. He later served (1976-81) as the Chief of the Office of Geochemistry and Geophysics, at USGS' headquarters in Reston, Virginia, and was in charge of the USGS studies before, during, and after the 18 May 1980 catastrophic eruption of Mount St. Helens. Thus, Bob is no stranger to hazardous impacts of plate tectonics. Since "rotating back" to a research position in 1982, Dr. Tilling resumed his studies of eruptive phenomena and associated hazards in the U.S. and abroad. He has written many articles -- technical and general-interest-- and has served as an invited consultant to a number of foreign countries (e.g., Colombia, Ecuador, Iceland, Indonesia, and Mexico). In February 1995, Bob agreed once again to accept a management position: Chief Scientist of the USGS Volcano Hazards Team, which is responsible for monitoring the active volcanoes in the U.S. and assessing their potential hazards. Since 1987, Bob has worked at the USGS' western regional center in Menlo Park, California; he resides with his wife, Susan, in the foothills of the nearby Santa Cruz Mountains. They have two grown daughters, Bobbi and Karen, living in the San Francisco Bay Area. When not studying volcanoes, Bob enjoys sculpting, hiking, playing racquetball, listening to music (classical and country), and tasting of fine wines. 

<#USGS6>
*
Eruptions of Mount St Helens, Past, Present and Future.
Introduction.
Mount St. Helens, located in southwestern Washington about 50 miles northeast of Portland, Oregon, is one of several lofty volcanic peaks that dominate the Cascade Range of the Pacific Northwest; the range extends from Mount Garibaldi in British Columbia, Canada, to Lassen Peak in northern California. Geologists call Mount St. Helens a composite volcano (or stratovolcano), a term for steepsided, often symmetrical cones constructed of alternating layers of lava flows, ash, and other volcanic debris. Composite volcanoes tend to erupt explosively and pose considerable danger to nearby life and property. In contrast, the gently sloping shield volcanoes, such as those in Hawaii, typically erupt nonexplosively, producing fluid lavas that can flow great distances from the active vents. Although Hawaiian-type eruptions may destroy property, they rarely cause death or injury. Before 1980, snow-capped, gracefully symmetrical Mount St. Helens was known as the "Fujiyama of America." Mount St. Helens, other active Cascade volcanoes, and those of Alaska form the North American segment of the circum-Pacific "Ring of Fire," a notorious zone that produces frequent, often destructive, earthquake and volcanic activity.
Cascade Range.
Some Indians of the Pacific Northwest variously called Mount St. Helens "Louwala-Clough," or "smoking mountain." The modern name, Mount St. Helens, was given to the volcanic peak in 1792 by Captain George Vancouver of the British Royal Navy, a seafarer and explorer. He named it in honor of a fellow countryman, Alleyne Fitzherbert, who held the title Baron St. Helens and who was at the time the British Ambassador to Spain. Vancouver also named three other volcanoes in the Cascades--Mounts Baker, Hood, and Rainier--for British naval officers.

Indians on the Cowlitz River watching an eruption of Mount St. Helens, as painted by Canadian artist Paul Kane following a visit to the volcano in 1847 

The local Indians and early settlers in the then sparsely populated region witnessed the occasional violent outbursts of Mount St. Helens. The volcano was particularly restless in the mid-19th century, when it was intermittently active for at least a 26-year span from 1831 to 1857. Some scientists suspect that Mount St. Helens also was active sporadically during the three decades before 1831, including a major explosive eruption in 1800. Although minor steam explosions may have occurred in 1898, 1903, and 1921, the mountain gave little or no evidence of being a volcanic hazard for more than a century after 1857. Consequently, the majority of 20th-century residents and visitors thought of Mount St. Helens not as a menace, but as a serene, beautiful mountain playground teeming with wildlife and available for leisure activities throughout the year. At the base of the volcano's northern flank, Spirit Lake, with its clear, refreshing water and wooded shores, was especially popular as a recreational area for hiking, camping, fishing, swimming and boating.

Principal drainages.
The tranquility of the Mount St. Helens region was shattered in the spring of 1980, however, when the volcano stirred from its long repose, shook, swelled, and exploded back to life. The local people rediscovered that they had an active volcano in their midst, and millions of people in North America were reminded that the active--and potentially dangerous--volcanoes of the United States are not restricted to Alaska and Hawaii.

Preface.

The climactic eruption of May 18, 1980, at about noon. The maximum height of
the ash and gas column was about 12 miles.

May 18, 1980. On that fateful day, Mount St. Helens Volcano in Washington exploded violently after 2 months of intense earthquake activity and intermittent, relatively weak eruptions, causing the worst volcanic disaster in the recorded history of the United States.
The cataclysmic eruption and events related to it caused the worst volcanic disaster in the history of the United States. The cataclysmic eruption and related events on May 18 rank among the most significant geologic events in the United States during the 20th century. The processes, effects, and products of the chain of events were the most intensively studied and photographically documented of any explosive volcanic eruption in the world to date. The wealth of data on Mount St. Helens before, during, and after the May 18 eruption enabled geoscientists of the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS), the University of Washington, and other research institutions in the United States and abroad to put into perspective the devastating impact of suddenly unleashed volcanic energy.
During 1981 and 1982, the results of many of these studies were published by the USGS in two comprehensive volumes, Professional Papers 1249 and 1250, both dedicated to the memory of David A. Johnston, a USGS volcanologist killed while making scientific observations on May 18. Intermittently active through the 1980s, Mount St. Helens continues to receive intensive study. This booklet--updated and revised from the first edition (1984) on occasion of the 10th anniversary of the May 18, 1980, eruption--presents selected highlights of the volcano's eruptive history, reviews its activity in the past decade, and speculates about its possible future behavior. Materials cited in the "Selected Readings" provide more detailed information on topics that have been omitted or treated only briefly.
 

Previous Eruptive History.
The story of Mount St. Helens is woven from geologic evidence gathered during studies that began with Lieutenant Charles Wilkes' U.S. Exploring Expedition in 1841. Many geologists have studied Mount St. Helens, but the work of Dwight R. Crandell, Donal R. Mullineaux, Clifford P. Hopson, and their associates, who began their studies in the late 1950's, has particularly advanced knowledge of Mount St. Helens. Their systematic studies of the volcanic deposits, laboratory investigations of rock and ash samples, and radiocarbon (carbon-l4) dating of plant remains buried in or beneath the ash layers and other volcanic products enabled them to reconstruct a remarkably complete record of the prehistoric eruptive behavior of Mount St. Helens.
Ancestral Mount St. Helens began to grow before the last major glaciation of the Ice Age had ended about 10,000 years ago. The oldest ash deposits were erupted at least 40,000 years ago onto an eroded surface of still older volcanic and sedimentary rocks. Intermittent volcanism continued after the glaciers disappeared, and nine main pulses of pre-1980 volcanic activity have been recognized. These periods lasted from about 5,000 years to less than 100 years each and were separated by dormant intervals of about 15,000 years to only 200 years. A forerunner of Spirit Lake was born about 3,500 years ago, or possibly earlier, when eruption debris formed a natural dam across the valley of the North Fork of the Toutle River. The most recent of the pre-1980 eruptive periods began about A.D. 1800 with an explosive eruption, followed by several additional minor explosions and extrusions of lava, and ended with the formation of the Goat Rocks lava dome by 1857.

The post-A.D. 1400 segment of the 50,000-year eruptive history of Mount St. Helens (after USGS Bulletin 1383-C).

Mount St. Helens is the youngest of the major Cascade volcanoes, in the sense that its visible cone was entirely formed during the past 2,200 years, well after the melting of the last of the Ice Age glaciers about 10,000 years ago. Mount St. Helens' smooth, symmetrical slopes are little affected by erosion as compared with its older, more glacially scarred neighbors--Mount Rainier and Mount Adams in Washington, and Mount Hood in Oregon. As geologic studies progressed and the eruptive history of Mount St. Helens became better known, scientists became increasingly concerned about possible renewed eruptions. The late William T. Pecora, a former Director of the USGS, was quoted in a May 10, 1968, newspaper article in the Christian Science Monitor as being "especially worried about snow-covered Mt. St. Helens."
On the basis of its youth and its high frequency of eruptions over the past 4,000 years, Crandell, Mullineaux, and their colleague Meyer Rubin published in February 1975 that Mount St. Helens was the one volcano in the conterminous United States most likely to reawaken and to erupt "perhaps before the end of this century." This prophetic conclusion was followed in 1978 by a more detailed report, in which Crandell and Mullineaux elaborated their earlier conclusion and analyzed, with maps and scenarios, the kinds, magnitudes, and areal extents of potential volcanic hazards that might be expected from future eruptions of Mount St. Helens. Collectively, these two publications contain one of the most accurate forecasts of a violent geologic event.


Reawakening and Initial Activity.

A view to the north of the "two-tone" mountain--an appearance produced by prevailing easterly winds during the initial activity of Mount St. Helens. 
Mount Rainier is visible in background.

A magnitude 4.2 (Richter Scale) earthquake on March 20, 1980, at 3:47 p.m. Pacific Standard Time (PST), preceded by several much smaller earthquakes beginning as early as March 16, was the first substantial indication of Mount St. Helens' awakening from its 123-year sleep. Earthquake activity increased during the following week, gradually at first and then rather dramatically at about noon on March 25. The number of earthquakes recorded daily reached peak levels in the next 2 days, during which 174 shocks with magnitudes greater than 2.6 were recorded. Many hundreds of smaller earthquakes accompanied these larger events, the largest of which were felt by people living close to the volcano. Aerial observations of Mount St. Helens during the week of seismic buildup revealed small earthquake-induced avalanches of snow and ice, but no sign of an eruption.
With a thunderous explosion, or possibly two nearly simultaneous ones, widely heard in the region at about 12:36 p.m. PST on March 27, Mount St. Helens began to spew ash and steam, marking the first significant eruption in the conterminous United States since that of Lassen Peak, California, from 1914 to 1917. The crown of the ash column rose to about 6,000 feet above the volcano. The initial explosions formed a 250-foot-wide crater within the larger, preexisting snow- and ice-filled summit crater, and new fractures broke across the summit area.


View of the "bulge" on the north face of Mount St. Helens, from a measurement site about 2 miles to the northeast (Photograph by Peter Lipman). The drawing above the photograph illustrates, in a highy exaggerated fashion, the nearly horizontal movement--about 85 feet in 20 days--of one of the measured points on the "bulge."

Through April 21, Mount St. Helens intermittently ejected ash and steam in bursts lasting from a few seconds to several tens of minutes. The first crater was joined on the west by a second, slightly larger crater, and as the activity continued, both craters enlarged and ultimately merged. Several avalanches of snow and ice, darkened by ash, formed prominent streaks down the mountain's slopes. The effect of the prevailing easterly wind was striking during the March-April eruptive activity, transforming the snow-covered Mount St. Helens into a "two-tone" mountain.
The ash blown out between March 27 and May 18 was derived entirely from the 350-year-old summit dome, shattered and pulverized by phreatic (steam-blast) processes driven by the explosively expanding, high-temperature steam and other gases. No magma (molten rock and contained gases) was tapped during the initial eruptions.
Intense earthquake activity persisted at the volcano during and between visible eruptive activity. As early as March 31, seismographs also began recording occasional spasms of volcanic tremor, a type of continuous, rhythmic ground shaking different from the discrete sharp jolts characteristic of earthquakes. Such continuous ground vibrations, commonly associated with eruptions at volcanoes in Hawaii, Iceland, Japan, and elsewhere, are interpreted to reflect subsurface movement of fluids, either gas or magma. The combination of sustained strong earthquake activity and harmonic tremor at Mount St. Helens suggested to scientists that magma and associated gases were on the move within the volcano, thereby increasing the probability of magma eruption.
Visible eruptive activity ceased temporarily in late April and early May. Small steam-blast eruptions resumed on May 7, continued intermittently for the next several days, and ceased again by May 16. During this interval, the forceful intrusion of magma into the volcano continued with no respite, as was shown by intense seismic activity and visible swelling and cracking of the volcano. The swelling was easily measurable and affected a large area on the north face of Mount St. Helens; this area became known as the "bulge," the initial growth of which probably began during the first eruption (March 27) or perhaps even a few days before. Through mid-May about 10,000 earthquakes were recorded. The earthquake activity was concentrated in a small zone less than 1.6 miles directly beneath the bulge on the north flank of Mount St. Helens.
A comparison of aerial photographs taken in the summer of 1979 with those taken during and after April 1980 showed that by May 12 certain parts of the bulge near the summit were more than 450 feet higher than before the magma intrusion began. Repeated measurements begun in late April with precise electronic instruments that shoot a laser beam to reflector targets placed on and around the bulge showed that it was growing northward at an astonishing rate of about 5 feet per day. The movement was predominantly horizontal--clear evidence that the bulge was not simply slipping down the volcano's steep slope. As the bulge moved northward, the summit area behind it progressively sank, forming a complex down-dropped block called a graben. These changes in the volcano's shape were related to the overall deformation that increased the volume of the mountain by 0.03 cubic mile by mid-May. This volume increase presumably corresponded to the volume of magma that pushed into the volcano and deformed its surface. Because the intruded magma remained below ground and was not directly visible, it was called a cryptodome, in contrast to a true volcanic dome exposed at the surface.In summary, during late March to mid-May 1980, Mount St. Helens was shaken by hundreds of earthquakes, intermittently erupted ash and debris derived by steam blast reaming out of its preexisting summit dome, and experienced extremely large and rapid deformation caused by magma intrusion. The hot intruding magma provided the thermal energy to heat groundwater, which explosively flashed to generate and sustain the observed steam-blast eruptions. For 2 months the volcano was literally being wedged apart, creating a highly unstable and dangerous situation. The eventual collapse of the bulge on the north flank triggered the chain of catastrophic events that took place on May 18, 1980.

The Climactic Eruption of May 18, 1980.

The climactic eruption in full fury in the late morning of May 18, 1980.

May 18, a Sunday, dawned bright and clear. At 7 a.m. Pacific Daylight Time (PDT), USGS volcanologist David A. Johnston, who had Saturday-night duty at an observation post about 6 miles north of the volcano, radioed in the results of some laser-beam measurements he had made moments earlier that morning. Even considering these measurements, the status of Mount St. Helens' activity that day showed no change from the pattern of the preceding month. Volcano-monitoring data--seismic, rate of bulge movement, sulfur-dioxide gas emission, and ground temperature--revealed no unusual changes that could be taken as warning signals for the catastrophe that would strike about an hour and a half later. About 20 seconds after 8:32 a.m. PDT, apparently in response to a magnitude 5.1 earthquake about 1 mile beneath the volcano, the bulged, unstable north flank of Mount St. Helens suddenly began to collapse, triggering a rapid and tragic train of events that resulted in widespread devastation and the loss of 57 people, including volcanologist Johnston.


Debris avalanche.
Aerial views of the volcano at the moment the summit collapse (see text) triggered the debris avalanche and associated catastrophic eruption (Photographs selected from the copyrighted sequence taken by Keith and Dorothy Stoffel). The tail of the plane can be seen in the upper right-hand corner of the lower picture, as the Stoffels took a final backward look while escaping.




Although the triggering earthquake was of slightly greater magnitude than any of the shocks recorded earlier at the volcano, it was not unusual in any other way. What happened within the next few seconds was described by geologists Keith and Dorothy Stoffel, who at the time were in a small plane over the volcano's summit. Among the events they witnessed, they "noticed landsliding of rock and ice debris inward into the crater. The south-facing wall of the north side of the main crater was especially active. Within a matter of seconds, perhaps 15 seconds, the whole north side of the summit crater began to move instantaneously. . . . The nature of movement was eerie. The entire mass began to ripple and churn up, without moving laterally. Then the entire north side of the summit began sliding to the north along a deep-seated slide plane. I [Keith Stoffel] was amazed and excited with the realization that we were watching this landslide of unbelievable proportions. We took pictures of this slide sequence occurring, but before we could snap off more than a few pictures, a huge explosion blasted out of the detachment plane. We neither felt nor heard a thing, even though we were just east of the summit at this time."
 
Schematic cross sections of Mount St. Helens showing the cryptodome of magma that produced the bulge and the three major blocks that collapsed to form the debris avalanche (After USGS Professional Paper 1250). Compare with photographs in "The Catastrophic First Minute."
 
A, The volcano in the early morning of May 18, 1980; the bulging of the north flank is clearly shown by the pre-1980 and pre-collapse profiles.

B and C, (within about 30 seconds after the collapse) show the progressive development of the debris avalanche and the beginning of both the lateral blast and vertical eruption, as the cryptodome was exposed; the Bulge block was the first to slide, followed by the Graben block.
D, (about another 30 seconds later), by now the Summit block had slid and the lateral blast had stopped; the vertical eruption was now in full fury.

 
Realizing their dangerous situation, the pilot put the plane into a steep dive to gain speed, and thus was able to outrun the rapidly mushrooming eruption cloud that threatened to engulf them. The Stoffels were fortunate to escape, and other scientists were fortunate to have their eyewitness account to help unscramble the sequence and timing of the quick succession of events that initiated the May 18 eruption.
View up the North Fork Toutle River toward Mount St. Helens (upper right) showing the valley choked with the hummocky deposits of the debris avalanche (Photograph by Austin Post).


The collapse of the north flank produced the largest landslide-debris avalanche recorded in historic time. Detailed analysis of photographs and other data shows that an estimated 7-20 seconds (about 10 seconds seems most reasonable) elapsed between the triggering earthquake and the onset of the flank collapse. During the next 15 seconds, first one large block slid away, then another large block began to move, only to be followed by still another block. The series of slide blocks merged downslope into a gigantic debris avalanche, which moved northward at speeds of 110 to 155 miles an hour. Part of the avalanche surged into and across Spirit Lake, but most of it flowed westward into the upper reaches of the North Fork of the Toutle River. At one location, about 4 miles north of the summit, the advancing front of the avalanche still had sufficient momentum to flow over a ridge more than 1,150 feet high. The resulting hummocky avalanche deposit consisted of intermixed volcanic debris, glacial ice, and, possibly, water displaced from Spirit Lake. Covering an area of about 24 square miles, the debris avalanche advanced more than 13 miles down the North Fork of the Toutle River and filled the valley to an average depth of about 150 feet; the total volume of the deposit was about 0.7 cubic mile. The dumping of avalanche debris into Spirit Lake raised its bottom by about 295 feet and its water level by about 200 feet.

Lateral "blast".
Within a few seconds after the onset and mobilization of the debris avalanche, the climactic eruptions of May 18 began as the sudden unloading of much of the volcano's north flank abruptly released the pent-up pressure of the volcanic system. The sudden removal of the upper part of the volcano by the landslides triggered the almost instantaneous expansion (explosion) of high temperature-high pressure steam present in cracks and voids in the volcano and of gases dissolved in the magma that caused the bulge of the cryptodome. The abrupt pressure release, or "uncorking," of the volcano by the debris avalanche can be compared in some ways to the sudden removal of the cap or a thumb from a vigorously shaken bottle of soda pop, or to punching a hole in a boiler tank under high pressure.
At Mount St. Helens, the "uncorking" unleashed a tremendous, northward-directed lateral blast of rock, ash, and hot gases that devastated an area of about 230 square miles in a fan-shaped sector north of the volcano. To the south, the devastated area was much less, extending only a small distance downslope from the summit. Along with older volcanic debris, the blast also included the first magmatic material erupted by Mount St. Helens, indicating that the landslides and the ensuing blast had exposed the cryptodome magma.

What appear to be blades of mown grass are actually large trees, some over 100 feet tall, flattened by the tremendous force of the lateral blast, even out to distances as far as 19 miles from the volcano (Photograph by Daniel Dzurisin).Although the lateral blast began some seconds later than the debris avalanche, the blast's velocity was much greater, so that it soon overtook the avalanche. Calculations have shown that the blast's initial velocity of about 220 miles an hour quickly increased to about 670 miles an hour. The average velocity did not surpass the speed of sound in the atmosphere (about 735 miles an hour). This observation is consistent with the lack of reports of loud atmospheric shocks or "sonic booms" from nearby observers such as Keith and Dorothy Stoffel in the light plane or survivors on the ground. In some areas near the blast front, however, the velocity may have approached, or even exceeded, the supersonic rate for a few moments.
The splintered and charred remains of a tree removed in the direct blast zone. 
In this picture, the direction of the blast was from right to left. Tree trunk was originally about 2 feet in diameter (Photograph by Robert Smith).

 
The blast was widely heard hundreds of miles away in the Pacific Northwest, including parts of British Columbia, Montana, Idaho, and northern California. 
Yet, in many areas much closer to Mount St. Helens--for example, Portland, Oregon, only 50 miles away--the blast was not heard. Subsequent studies by the Oregon Museum of Science and Industry demonstrated a so-called "quiet zone" around Mount St. Helens, extending radially a few tens of miles, in which the eruption was not heard. The creation of the "quiet zone" and the degree to which the eruption was heard elsewhere depended on the complex response of the eruption sound waves to differences in temperature and air motion of the atmospheric layers and, to a lesser extent, local topography.

Border area of the lateral-blast zone. Dead trees of the "seared zone" (middle ground) stand between the flatteded trees of the "tree-down zone" (foreground) and unaffected forest (upper right) (Photograph by Lyn Topinka in April 1982). 

The near-supersonic lateral blast, loaded with volcanic debris, caused widespread devastation as far as 19 miles from the volcano. The area affected by the blast can be subdivided into three roughly concentric zones:Direct blast zone, the innermost zone, averaged about 8 miles in radius, an area in which virtually everything, natural or manmade, was obliterated or carried away. For this reason, this zone also has been called the tree-removal zone." The flow of the material carried by the blast was not deflected by topographic features in this zone.

Channelized blast zone, an intermediate zone, extended out to distances as far as 19 miles from the volcano, an area in which the flow flattened everything in its path and was channeled to some extent by topography. In this zone, the force and direction of the blast are strikingly demonstrated by the parallel alignment of toppled large trees, broken off at the base of the trunk as if they were blades of grass mown by a scythe. This zone was also known as the "tree-down zone."

Seared zone, also called the "standing dead" zone, the outermost fringe of the impacted area, a zone in which trees remained standing, but singed brown by the hot gases of the blast. 

Generalized map showing the lateral-blast zones.
A similar, but narrower and northeast-trending, strong laterally directed explosion occurred at Mount St. Helens about 1,100 years ago. The blast of May 18, 1980, however, traveled at least three times as far as the 1,100-year-old blast. Thus, the occurrence of a lateral blast such as that of May 18 was not the first in Mount St. Helens' history, but its power and resulting destruction were unprecedented. The lateral blast, debris avalanche, and associated mudflows and floods caused most of the casualties and destruction on May 18; the adverse impact of volcanic ash fallout downwind was minor by comparison.

Ash eruption and fallout.
A strong, vertically directed explosion of ash and steam began very shortly after the lateral blast. The resulting eruptive column rose very quickly. In less than 10 minutes, the ash column reached an altitude of more than 12 miles and began to expand into a characteristic mushroom-shaped ash cloud. Near the volcano, the swirling ash particles in the atmosphere generated lightning, which in turn started many forest fires. As the eruption roared on, the major part of the ash cloud drifted downwind in an east-northeasterly direction, although ash that rose above the high-speed (jet-stream) winds followed other paths determined by complex wind directions.
The early form of the May 18 eruption plume, which was not photographed, probably resembled the mushroom-shaped ash cloud of the July 22, 1980, eruption shown here (Photograph by James Vallence).

Clear skies permitted tracking the advance of the drifting cloud by satellite imagery. Moving at an average speed of about 60 miles an hour, the cloud reached Yakima, Washington, by 9:45 a.m. PDT and Spokane, Washington, by 11:45 a.m. The ash cloud was dense enough to screen out nearly all sunlight, activating darkness-sensitive switches on street lights in Yakima and Spokane. Street lights remained on for the rest of the darkened day, as the eruption continued vigorously for more than 9 hours, pumping ash into the atmosphere and feeding the drifting ash cloud.
The eruptive column fluctuated in height through the day, but the eruption subsided by late afternoon on May 18. By early May 19, the eruption had stopped. By that time, the ash cloud had spread to the central United States. Two days later, even though the ash cloud had become more diffuse, fine ash was detected by systems used to monitor air pollution in several cities of the northeastern United States. Some of the ash drifted around the globe within about 2 weeks. After circling many more times, most of the ash settled to the Earth's surface, but some of the smallest fragments and aerosols are likely to remain suspended in the upper atmosphere for years.
 
Weather-satellite imagery (courtesy of NOAA) tracked the movement of the eruption plume: left (0845 PDT)--the expanding plume shortly after the beginning of the May 18 eruption; right (1215 PDT)--the plume had reached Idaho, and a new pulse of ash can be seen at the volcano.

The generalized map shows the distribution of ash fallout from the May 18 eruption.

Prevailing winds distributed the fallout from the ash cloud over a wide region. Light ash falls were reported in most of the Rocky Mountain States, including northern New Mexico, and fine ash dusted a few scattered areas farther east and northeast of the main path. The heaviest ash deposition occurred in a 60-mile-long swath immediately downwind of the volcano. Another area of thick ash deposition, however, occurred near Ritzville in eastern Washington, about 195 miles from Mount St. Helens, where nearly 2 inches of ash blanketed the ground, more than twice as much as at Yakima, which is only about half as far from the volcano. Scientists believe that this unexpected variation in ash thickness may reflect differences in wind velocity and direction with altitude, fluctuations in the height of the ash column during the 9 hours of activity, and the effect of localized clumping of fine ash particles leading to preferential fallout of the large particle clumps.
(Left) The advancing ash cloud from Mount St. Helens, as seen from the ground in eastern Washington.
(Right) Eastern Washington resident sweeping the ash from the roof of his house 




During the 9 hours of vigorous eruptive activity, about 540 million tons of ash fell over an area of more than 22,000 square miles. The total volume of the ash before its compaction by rainfall was about 0.3 cubic mile, equivalent to an area the size of a football field piled about 150 miles high with fluffy ash. The volume of the uncompacted ash is equivalent to about 0.05 cubic mile of solid rock, or only about 7 percent of the amount of material that slid off in the debris avalanche. The eruption of ash also further enlarged the depression formed initially by the debris avalanche and lateral blast, and helped to create a great amphitheater-shaped crater open to the north. This new crater was about 1 mile by 2 miles wide and about 2,100 feet deep from its rim to its lowest point. The area of this crater roughly encompassed that of the former bulge on the north flank of the volcano and the former summit dome. After the eruption, the highest point on the volcano was about 8,364 feet, or 1,313 feet lower than the former summit elevation.
 

Pyroclastic flows.
The term "pyroclastic''--derived from the Greek words pyro (fire) and klastos (broken)--describes materials formed by the fragmentation of magma and rock by explosive volcanic activity. Most volcanic ash is basically fine-grained pyroclastic material composed of tiny particles of explosively disintegrated old volcanic rock or new magma. Larger sized pyroclastic fragments are called lapilli, blocks, or bombs. Pyroclastic flows--sometimes called nuees ardentes (French for "glowing clouds")--are hot, often incandescent mixtures of volcanic fragments and gases that sweep along close to the ground. Depending on the volume of material, proportion of solids to gas, temperature, and slope gradient, the flows can travel at velocities as great as 450 miles an hour. Pyroclastic flows can be extremely destructive and deadly because of their high temperature and mobility. During the 1902 eruption of Mont Pelee (Martinique, West Indies), for example, a nuee ardente demolished the coastal city of St. Pierre, killing nearly 30,000 inhabitants.
Pyroclastic flows commonly are produced either by the fallback and downslope movement of fragments from an eruption column or by the direct frothing over at the vent of magma undergoing rapid gas loss. Volcanic froth so formed is called pumice. Pyroclastic flows originated in both ways at Mount St. Helens on May 18, but flows of mappable volume were of the latter type. The flows were entirely restricted to a small fan-shaped zone that flares northward from the summit crater.

Explosion pits were formed by "secondary" eruptions when the hot volcanic debris came into contact with water or moist ground. This picture also shows an eruption in progress (lower center) (Photograph by Daniel Dzurisin).Pyroclastic flows were first directly observed shortly after noon, although they probably began to form a short time after the lateral blast. They continued to occur intermittently during the next 5 hours of strong eruptive activity. Eyewitness accounts indicated that the more voluminous pyroclastic flows originated by the upwelling of volcanic ejecta to heights below the rim of the crater, followed by lateral flow northward through the breach of the crater. One scientist likened this process to a "pot of oatmeal boiling over." Most of the rock in these flows was pumice. A few smaller pyroclastic flows were observed to form by gravitational collapse of parts of the high eruption column. The successive outpourings of pyroclastic material consisted mainly of new magmatic debris rather than fragments of preexisting volcanic rocks. The resulting deposits formed a fan-like pattern of overlapping sheets, tongues, and lobes. At least 17 separate pyroclastic flows occurred during the May 18 eruption, and their aggregate volume was about 0.05 cubic mile.
When temperature measurements could safely be made in the pyroclastic flows 2 weeks after they were erupted, the deposits ranged in temperature from about 570° to 785°F. As might be expected, when the hot material of the debris avalanche and the even hotter pyroclastic flows encountered bodies of water or moist ground, the water flashed explosively to steam; the resulting phreatic (steam-blast) explosions sent plumes of ash and steam as high as 1.2 miles above the ground. These "secondary" or "rootless" steam-blast eruptions formed many explosion pits on the northern margin of the pyroclastic flow deposits, at the south shore of Spirit Lake, and along the upper part of the North Fork of the Toutle River. These steam-blast explosions continued sporadically for weeks or months after the emplacement of pyroclastic flows, and at least one occurred about a year later, on May 16, 1981.

Mudflows and floods.
Volcanic debris flows--mobile mixtures of volcanic debris and water popularly called mudflows--often accompany pyroclastic eruptions, if water is available to erode and transport the loose pyroclastic deposits on the steep slopes of stratovolcanoes. Destructive mudflows and debris flows began within minutes of the onset of the May 18 eruption, as the hot pyroclastic materials in the debris avalanche, lateral blast, and ash falls melted snow and glacial ice on the upper slopes of Mount St. Helens. Such flows are also called lahars, a term borrowed from Indonesia, where volcanic eruptions have produced many such deposits.
Mudflows were observed as early as 8:50 a.m. PDT in the upper reaches of the South Fork of the Toutle River. The largest and most destructive mudflows, however, were those that developed several hours later in the North Fork of the Toutle River, when the water-saturated parts of the massive debris avalanche deposits began to slump and flow. The mudflows in the Toutle River drainage area ultimately dumped more than 65 million cubic yards of sediment along the lower Cowlitz and Columbia Rivers. The water-carrying capacity of the Cowlitz River was reduced by 85 percent, and the depth of the Columbia River navigational channel was decreased from 39 feet to less than 13 feet, disrupting river traffic and choking off ocean shipping. Mudflows also swept down the southeast flank of the volcano--along the Swift Creek, Pine Creek, and Muddy River drainages--and emptied nearly 18 million cubic yards of water, mud, and debris into the Swift Reservoir. The water level of the reservoir had been purposely kept low as a precaution to minimize the possibility that the reservoir could be overtopped by the additional water-mud-debris load to cause flooding of the valley downstream. Fortunately, the volume of the additional load was insufficient to cause overtopping even if the reservoir had been full.

Generalized geologic map showing the impact and deposits of the climactic eruption in the vicinity of the volcano.
   
On the upper steep slopes of the volcano, the mudflows traveled as fast as 90 miles an hour; the velocity then progressively slowed to about 3 miles an hour as the flows encountered the flatter and wider parts of the Toutle River drainage. Even after traveling many tens of miles from the volcano and mixing with cold waters, the mudflows maintained temperatures in the range of about 84° to 91°F.; they undoubtedly had higher temperatures closer to the eruption source. Shortly before 3 p.m., the mud and debris-choked Toutle River crested about 21 feet above normal at a point just south of the confluence of the North and South Forks. Another stream gage at Castle Rock, about 3 miles downstream from where the Toutle joins the Cowlitz, indicated a high-water (and mud) mark also about 20 feet above normal at midnight of May 18. Locally the mudflows surged up the valley walls as much as 360 feet and over hills as high as 250 feet. From the evidence left by the "bathtub-ring" mudlines, the larger mudflows at their peak averaged from 33 to 66 feet deep. The actual deposits left behind after the passage of the mudflow crests, however, were considerably thinner, commonly less than 10 percent of their depth during peak flow. For example, the mudflow deposits along much of the Toutle River averaged less than 3 feet thick.


Mudflow-damaged house along the Toutle River. The height of the mudflow is shown by the "bathtub-ring" mudlines seen on the tree trunks and the house itself 
  

The catastrophic first minute.
During the initial hours of the May 18 activity, people were obviously confused about the nature and sequence of the phenomena taking place. Did the eruption trigger the 5.1 magnitude earthquake or did the earthquake trigger the eruption? Or were both associated with some other, but unknown, cause or causes? At first, these questions and others could not be answered because of the rapidity of developments and the initial lack of firsthand observations by people who were close to the mountain and who survived the catastrophe. It was not until many hours, indeed days, later that scientists were able to reconstruct clearly the sequence of events. The reconstruction was aided by eyewitness accounts. Geologists Keith and Dorothy Stoffel, flying over the volcano in a small plane when the earthquake struck, observed "minor landsliding of rock and ice debris" into the crater. Within the next 15 seconds, the north flank of the volcano "began to ripple and churn up, without moving laterally." At the same time the Stoffels were witnessing from the air the developing debris avalanche, a remarkable series of ground-based photographs was being taken by Keith Ronnholm and Gary Rosenquist from Bear Meadows, a camping area located about 11 miles northeast of Mount St. Helens. Seconds after the earthquake, William Dilly, a member of the Rosenquist party, noticed through binoculars that the north flank was becoming "fuzzy, like there was dust being thrown down the side" and shouted that the "mountain was going." Within seconds Rosenquist began taking photographs in rapid succession.
Frame-by-frame analysis of the Rosenquist photographs, taken within a span of about 40 seconds, together with seismic and other evidence, established the following sequence of events during the first minute of the climactic eruptions. The times indicated are in hours, minutes, and seconds (Pacific Daylight Time).
 
These photographs were selected from the sequence taken by Gary Rosenquist ((c)copyright Gary Rosenquist 1980).

08:27 (approximate) Pre-earthquake view of the bulge on the volcano's north flank produced by the growing cryptodome of magma intruded since March 20. About 5 minutes later (08:32:11.4 PDT), a 5.1 magnitude earthquake struck beneath the mountain at shallow depth.08:32:53.3 The first slide block now had dropped sufficiently to expose more of the cryptodome magma, accelerating the explosive expansion of gases in the magma and the eruption of the first magmatic material of the 1980 eruptions.

08:32:47.0 Estimate of the time of the first photograph in Rosenquist's sequence that shows movement of the mountain. By this time, the first slide block had already dropped about 2,300 feet and a second block behind it had slid 330 feet. The beginning of the north flank's collapse and downward movement to initiate the debris avalanche was estimated to be 26 seconds earlier (08:32:21.0 PDT).
08:33:03.7 The continuing movement of the slide blocks and explosions had now thoroughly "uncorked" the magmatic system of the cryptodome, and old and new (magmatic) debris were blasted outward by increasingly more powerful explosions. The high-velocity lateral blast cloud, with its clearly visible trajectory trails of large blocks, was overtaking the slower moving debris avalanche.

08:32:49.2 A little more than 2 seconds later, as the slide blocks continued to move, the initial explosions of the vertical eruption column as well as the lateral blast, although obscure, had already begun.08:33:18.8 Less than a minute after the start of the debris avalanche, the eruption of Mount St. Helens was in full fury, further enlarging the crater as smaller slide blocks fell into the vent and were blasted away. The leading front of the lateral blast now had completely overtaken the debris avalanche.

 
The lateral blast at the vent probably lasted no more than about 30 seconds, but the northward radiating and expanding blast cloud continued for about another minute, extending to areas more than 16 miles from the volcano. Shortly after the blast shot out laterally, the vertically directed ash column rose to an altitude of about 16 miles in less than 15 minutes, and the vigorous emission of ash continued for the next 9 hours. The eruption column began to decline at about 5:30 p.m. and diminished to a very low level by early morning of May 19.The extraordinary photographic documentation of the first minute enabled scientists to reconstruct accurately what had happened. The 5.1-magnitude earthquake caused the gravitational collapse of Mount St. Helens' north flank, which produced the debris avalanche and triggered the ensuing violent lateral and vertical eruptions. From a scientific perspective, it was fortunate that the initial May 18 events occurred during daylight hours under cloudless conditions; otherwise, the sequence of events during that crucial first minute following the earthquake would have been difficult to reconstruct precisely.

Impact and aftermath.
The May 18, 1980, eruption was the most destructive in the history of the United States. Novarupta (Katmai) Volcano, Alaska, erupted considerably more material in 1912, but owing to the isolation and sparse population of the region affected, there were no human deaths and little property damage. In contrast, Mount St. Helens' eruption in a matter of hours caused loss of lives and widespread destruction of valuable property, primarily by the debris avalanche, the lateral blast, and the mudflows.
Landscape changes caused by the May 18 eruption were readily seen on high-altitude photographs. Such images, however, cannot reveal the impacts of the devastation on people and their works. The May 18 eruption resulted in scores of injuries and the loss of 57 lives. Within the United States before May 18, 1980, only two known casualties had been attributed to volcanic activity--a photographer was struck by falling rocks during the explosive eruption of Kilauea Volcano, Hawaii, in 1924; and an Army sergeant who disappeared during the 1944 eruption of Cleveland Volcano, Chuginadak Island, Aleutians. Autopsies indicated that most of Mount St. Helens' victims died by asphyxiation from inhaling hot volcanic ash, and some by thermal and other injuries.The lateral blast, debris avalanche, mudflows, and flooding caused extensive damage to land and civil works. All buildings and related manmade structures in the vicinity of Spirit Lake were buried. More than 200 houses and cabins were destroyed and many more were damaged in Skamania and Cowlitz Counties, leaving many people homeless. Many tens of thousands of acres of prime forest, as well as recreational sites, bridges, roads, and trails, were destroyed or heavily damaged. More than 185 miles of highways and roads and 15 miles of railways were destroyed or extensively damaged.

High-altitude color-infrared photographs of the Mount St. Helens region "before" and "after" the eruption of May 18, 1980. Note the changes in the shoreline of Spirit Lake (upper right corner). Green vegetation unaffected by the eruption appears as red (Photographs courtesy of NASA).
Trees amounting to more than 4 billion board feet of salable timber were damaged or destroyed, primarily by the lateral blast. At least 25 percent of the destroyed timber has been salvaged since September 1980. Hundreds of loggers have been involved in the timber-salvage operations, and, during peak summer months, more than 600 truckloads of salvaged timber were retrieved each day. Wildlife in the Mount St. Helens area also suffered heavily. The Washington State Department of Game estimated that nearly 7,000 big game animals (deer, elk, and bear) perished in the area most affected by the eruption, as well as all birds and most small mammals. However, many small animals, chiefly burrowing rodents, frogs, salamanders, and crawfish, managed to survive because they were below ground level or water surface when the disaster struck. The Washington Department of Fisheries estimated that 12 million Chinook and Coho salmon fingerlings were killed when hatcheries were destroyed; these might have developed into about 360,000 adult salmon. Another estimated 40,000 young salmon were lost when they were forced to swim through the turbine blades of hydroelectric generators because the levels of the reservoirs along the Lewis River south of Mount St. Helens were kept low to accommodate possible mudflows and flooding.
 

Panoramic view of Mounts St. Helens from Mount Margaret, about 9 miles north 

  Mount St. Helens viewed from the same point after the May 18, 1980, eruption.

Downwind of the volcano, in areas of thick ash accumulation, many agricultural crops, such as wheat, apples, potatoes, and alfalfa, were destroyed. Many crops survived, however, in areas blanketed by only a thin covering of ash. In fact, the apple and wheat production in 1980 was higher than normal due to greater-than-average summer precipitation. The crusting of ash also helped to retain soil moisture through the summer. Moreover, in the long term, the ash may provide beneficial chemical nutrients to the soils of eastern Washington, which themselves were formed of older glacial deposits that contain a significant ash component. Effects of the ash fall on the water quality of streams, lakes, and rivers were short-lived and minor.

Stand of timber in the "tree-down" zone north of Mount St. Helens devastated by the lateral blast. The downed trees were salvaged as quickly as possible before the wood began to rot. Note the two people (circled) in lower right The ash fall, however, did pose some temporary major problems for transportation operations and for sewage-disposal and water-treatment systems. Because visibility was greatly decreased during the ash fall, many highways and roads were closed to traffic, some only for a few hours, but others for weeks. Interstate 90 from Seattle to Spokane, Washington, was closed for a week. Air transportation was disrupted for a few days to 2 weeks as several airports in eastern Washington shut down due to ash accumulation and attendant poor visibility. Over a thousand commercial flights were canceled following airport closures.
The fine-grained, gritty ash caused substantial problems for internal-combustion engines and other mechanical and electrical equipment. The ash contaminated oil systems, clogged air filters, and scratched moving surfaces. Fine ash caused short circuits in electrical transformers, which in turn caused power blackouts. The sewage-disposal systems of several municipalities that received about half an inch or more of ash, such as Moses Lake and Yakima, Washington, were plagued by ash clogging and damage to pumps, filters, and other equipment. Fortunately, as these same cities used deep wells and closed storage, their water-supply systems were only minimally affected.
Front-end loader removing ash from Mount St. Helens as part of the massive cleanup effort in eastern Washington (Copyrighted photograph by Daryl Gusey).

   
The removal and disposal of ash from highways, roads, buildings, and airport runways were monumental tasks for some eastern Washington communities. State and Federal agencies estimated that over 2.4 million cubic yards of ash--equivalent to about 900,000 tons in weight--were removed from highways and airports in Washington State. Ash removal cost $2.2 million and took 10 weeks in Yakima. The need to remove ash quickly from transportation routes and civil works dictated the selection of some disposal sites. Some cities used old quarries and existing sanitary landfills; others created dumpsites wherever expedient. To minimize wind reworking of ash dumps, the surfaces of some disposal sites have been covered with topsoil and seeded with grass. About 250,000 cubic yards of ash have been stockpiled at five sites and can be retrieved easily for constructional or industrial use at some future date if economic factors are favorable.
What was the cost of the destruction and damage caused by the May 18 eruption? Accurate cost figures remain difficult to determine. Early estimates were too high and ranged from $2 to $3 billion, primarily reflecting the timber, civil works, and agricultural losses. A refined estimate of $1.1 billion was determined in a study by the International Trade Commission at the request of Congress. A supplemental appropriation of $951 million for disaster relief was voted by Congress, of which the largest share went to the Small Business Administration, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
There were indirect and intangible costs of the eruption as well. Unemployment in the immediate region of Mount St. Helens rose tenfold in the weeks immediately following the eruption and then nearly returned to normal once timber salvaging and ash cleanup operations were underway. Only a small percentage of residents left the region because of lost jobs owing to the eruption. Several months after May 18, a few residents reported suffering stress and emotional problems, even though they had coped successfully during the crisis. The counties in the region requested funding for mental health programs to assist such people.
Initial public reaction to the May 18 eruption nearly dealt a crippling blow to tourism, an important industry in Washington. Not only was tourism down in the Mount St. Helens-Gifford Pinchot National Forest area, but conventions, meetings, and social gatherings also were canceled or postponed at cities and resorts elsewhere in Washington and neighboring Oregon not affected by the eruption. The negative impact on tourism and conventioneering, however, proved only temporary. Mount St. Helens, perhaps because of its eruptive activity, has regained its appeal for tourists. The U.S. Forest Service (USFS) and State of Washington opened visitor centers and provided access for people to view firsthand the volcano's awesome devastation.
The spectacular eruption impressed upon the people in the Pacific Northwest that they share their lands with both active and potentially active volcanoes. With the passage of time, the damaged forests, streams, and fields will heal, and the memory of the 1980 eruption and its impacts will fade in future generations. The Mount St. Helens experience has been so thoroughly documented, however, that it likely will be a reminder for decades in the future of the possibility of renewed volcanic activity and destruction.

Comparisons With Other Eruptions.
The May 18, 1980, eruption of Mount St. Helens was exceeded in "size" by many other eruptions, both in historic times and in the recent geologic past.
For the study of earthquakes, two standard measures of the "size" of the seismic event are commonly used: the Richter Magnitude Scale (based on energy released as measured by seismometers) and the Modified Mercalli Intensity Scale (based on damage caused as assessed by people). Although some attempts have been made to develop a scale to compare the relative sizes of volcanic eruptions, none has yet been adopted for general use. Volcanologists have proposed and used various schemes to rank eruptions, and these generally included one or more of the following factors--height of eruption column, volume of material erupted, distance and height of hurled blocks and fragments, amount of aerosols injected into the upper atmosphere, and duration of eruption. All these factors relate directly or indirectly to the total amount of energy released during the eruption. Perhaps the two most commonly used and directly measurable factors are eruption volume and height of the eruption column.
The May 18 eruption ejected about 0.3 cubic mile of uncompacted ash, not counting an unknown but probably much smaller amount that was deposited in the atmosphere or too diffuse to form measurable deposits. This volume of ash is less than those of several earlier eruptions of Mount St. Helens and considerably less than the ejecta volumes of some historic eruptions elsewhere. The 1815 eruption of Tambora (Sumbawa, Indonesia) ejected about 30 to 80 times more ash than did Mount St. Helens in 1980. The 1815 Tambora eruption ranks as the largest known explosive eruption in historic times. But even the Tambora eruption pales by comparison with the gigantic pyroclastic eruptions from volcanic systems such as Long Valley Caldera (California), Valles Caldera (New Mexico), and Yellowstone Caldera (Wyoming)--which, within about the last million years, produced ejecta volumes as much as 100 times greater.

Ejecta volume, in cubic miles.
 
Some scientists recently proposed the Volcanic Explosivity Index (VEI) to attempt to standardize the assignment of the size of an explosive eruption, using ejecta volume as well as the other criteria mentioned earlier. The VEI scale ranges from 0 to 8. A VEI of 0 denotes a nonexplosive eruption, regardless of volume of erupted products. Eruptions designated a VEI of 5 or higher are considered "very large" explosive events, which occur worldwide only on an average of about once every 2 decades. The May 1980 eruption of Mount St. Helens rated a VEI of 5, but just barely; its lateral blast was powerful, but its output of magma was rather small. The VEI has been determined for more than 5,000 eruptions in the last 10,000 years. None of these eruptions rates the maximum VEI of 8. For example, the eruption of Vesuvius Volcano in A.D. 79, which destroyed Pompeii and Herculaneum, only rates a VEI of 5. Since A.D. 1500, only 21 eruptions with VEI 5 or greater have occurred: one VEI 7 (the 1815 Tambora eruption), four of VEI 6 (including Krakatau in 1883), and sixteen of VEI 5 (counting Mount St. Helens in 1989 and El Chichon, Mexico in 1982). 
Considered barely "very large," the eruption of Mount St. Helens in May 1980 was smaller than most other "very large" eruptions within the past 10,000 years and much smaller than the enormous caldera-forming eruptions--which would rate VEl's of 8--that took place earlier than 10,000 years ago.
The number of casualties and extent of destruction also have been used to compare the "bigness" of volcanic eruptions. For obvious reasons, such comparisons are limited at best and misleading at worst. Some of the most destructive eruptions have not been in other terms "very large." For example, mudflows triggered by the November 1985 eruption of Nevado del Ruiz (Colombia) killed more than 25,000 people--resulting in the worst volcanic disaster in the 20th century since the catastrophe at Mont Pelee in 1902. Yet, the eruption was very small, producing only about 3 percent of the volume of ash ejected during the May 1980 eruption of Mount St. Helens. As the table below clearly shows, of the seven greatest volcanic disasters in terms of casualties since A.D. 1500, only two of them (Tambora and Krakatau) qualify as "very large" eruptions (VEl's greater than 5) in terms of their explosive force.
The May 1980 eruption of Mount St. Helens has a higher VEI (5) than five of the deadliest eruptions in the history of mankind, but it resulted in the loss of far fewer lives (57). Loss of life would have been much greater if a hazard warning had not been issued and a zone of restricted access had not been established.

Volcanic Explosivity Index (VEI) of the deadliest eruptions since A.D. 1500.
Subsequent Eruptive Activity.
Since May 18, 1980, Mount St. Helens has remained intermittently active, and through early 1990 and at least 21 more periods of eruptive activity had occurred. Geologists view these periods of activity as eruptive episodes of one eruption that continued through the decade, rather than separate eruptions. The first of these smaller but significant eruptive episodes began early Sunday morning, May 25, 1980, when Mount St. Helens explosively erupted ash and formed an eruption column that rose to a maximum altitude of 9 miles. At least one pyroclastic flow accompanied the vertical ash emission. Although this eruption was considerably less energetic and voluminous than that of May 18, it nonetheless caused much concern because of memories of the events of the previous Sunday. Variable winds dispersed ash over southwestern Washington and neighboring Oregon, producing small to moderate ash falls in communities that had been spared the ash fall of May 18.
For the next 2 weeks, Mount St. Helens remained relatively quiet, puffing gas but little ash. Meanwhile, rootless steam-blast eruptions continued in the northern periphery of the apron of the pyroclastic flows in the valley of the North Fork of the Toutle River. On clear nights, aerial observers reported seeing glows in the vent within the crater, interpreted to reflect the near-surface presence of very hot rock or magma, although no lava was extruded. On June 12, the volcano again erupted, generating ash falls to the south-southwest and pyroclastic flows down its north flank. The June 12 episode was similar to that on May 25 in style and volume, and both eruptions were preceded by volcanic tremor a few hours in advance.
Probably within hours following the explosive activity on June 12, but hidden by poor visibility, very stiff magma began to ascend in the vent, slowly oozed onto the crater floor, and formed a bulbous lava dome (a mound of sticky lava) about 1,200 feet in diameter and 150 feet high. Such lava domes commonly form at composite volcanoes following major explosive eruptions. The formation what was to be the first of three domes at Mount St. Helens during the 1980s was confirmed by observers on June 15, when visibility over the volcano improved.Mount St. Helens erupted again in three explosive pulses during the afternoon and evening of July 22. The July eruptive episode was preceded by several days of measurable expansion of the summit area, heightened earthquake activity, and changed emission rates of sulfur dioxide and carbon dioxide. Plumes of ash rose to altitudes of between 6 and 11 miles. The July 22 events destroyed most of the dome formed in mid-June, and pyroclastic flows poured through the north breach of the summit crater and overrode earlier flows of May and June. No dome developed after the end of the explosive activity, which ejected only about one-tenth as much ash as did the May 25 and June 12 explosions.
During the next 3 months, explosive episodes occurred on August 7 and on October 16-18. These events were preceded by differing combinations of the following precursors: increased earthquake activity, volcanic tremor, changed rates of gas emission, and expansion of the crater near the vent. Both episodes produced ash-and-gas clouds and pyroclastic flows. A small dome formed after the August explosions but was blasted away at the start of the October activity.
Summary of eruptive activity.
Another dome began to form within 30 minutes after the final explosion on October 18, and within a few days it was about 900 feet wide and 130 feet high. The October 16-18 eruptive episode turned out to be the last major explosive activity at Mount St. Helens during the 1980s. All subsequent eruptive episodes, beginning with the December 27, 1980-January 3, 1981 episode, involved predominantly nonexplosive, dome-building activity that added material to the October dome. During the remainder of 1981, five such dome-building episodes, accompanied by little or no ash ejection, took place: February 5-7, April 10-12, June 18-19, September 6-11, and October 30-November 2.
Three eruptive episodes occurred in 1982: March 19-April 9, May 14-18, and August 18-23. A moderate explosion initiated the March-April episode, ejecting ash 9 miles high and melting snow in the crater that generated a mudflow which eventually entered the North Fork of the Toutle River. Dome growth followed this explosion. The May and August episodes reverted to the nonexplosive style and involved only dome growth. For about a month following the end of the May event, however, small explosions were frequent and at times impressive, producing spectacular vertical plumes of gas and rock debris many thousands of feet high. These were visible from Portland, Oregon (50 miles away) and, on occasion, even from Seattle (100 miles away). More than 500 similar small explosions occurred sporadically until 1986, during times when the dome was not growing. Scientists believe that these small explosions were caused either or both of the following processes: steam-blasts triggered when cold infiltrating rain and snow melt came in contact with the subsurface hott part of the dome and magma conduit, and rapid expansion of gas carried by the magma itself. Many of the explosions occurred in the late spring and early summer, when snow melt is at a maximum.

First lava dome.
A year-long episode of eruptive activity began on February 7, 1983. It was preceded by several explosions on February 2-4 that resembled those just described. The largest of the February explosions produced plumes of gas and ash 2 to 4 miles high. These explosions ripped open a gash high on the east flank of the dome, through which lava extruded several days later. The February dome-building activity culminated in the formation of a spine-like protrusion of lava that rose about 100 feet above the summit of the dome. This spine, as did other smaller ones, lasted for only about 2 weeks and then collapsed into a heap of rubble. Slow growth of the dome took place more or less continuously throughout 1983, accompanied at times by small explosions from a crater at the crest of the dome. During this time, the dome grew not only as lava was added to its surface (extrusion) but also as magma entered and inflated the dome as if a water balloon were being filled (intrusion).

A spine-like protrusion of lava rose about 100 feet above the summit of the dome during February 1983.
The year-long eruptive episode ended in February 1984, but activity resumed on March 29 and lasted until about April 2, producing a small lava lobe on the surface of the dome. More small explosions occurred during the spring and summer months, and on September 10-12 a large lava lobe was extruded, accompanied by major distention of the north part of the dome at unprecedented rates that approached 120 feet per day!


Dramatic dome growth during the 1981-85 period: (Top) Viewed in August 1981 from a camera station at a distance of about 0.5 mile; the dome is about 535 feet high, or nearly as tall as the George Washington Monument. (Bottom) Seen in August 1985 from the same station; the dome has grown considerably wider and another 220 feet higher (Photographs by Lyn Topinka).
Considerable distention also occurred during the next eruptive episode, May 24-June 10, 1985, when the southern third of the dome was pushed more than 300 feet southward by an intrusion, leaving a deep gorge in its wake that stretched across the dome like a "smile" on a golf ball. Only a little lava oozed from the floor of this gorge (called a graben by geologists), but more than 5 million cubic yards of magma entered the dome and remained stored there.
The last two significant eruptive episodes of the 1980s occurred on May 8-13 and October 21-24, 1986. Each episode was similar, producing a large lava lobe and major internal expansion of the dome. Small explosions preceded the activity in May but not in October. These two episodes, as well as those in September 1984 and May 1985, were accompanied by much more intense earthquake activity than was associated with prior dome-building episodes. This change in style of precursory seismicity, together with the changed style of eruptive activity--from mainly extrusion to about equal occurrence of extrusion and intrusion--suggested that the magma had become stiffer and less able to rise easily to the surface than previously. Moreover, the rate of sulfur dioxide release had progressively decreased with time, suggesting that the magma was "running out of gas." Thus, scientists were not surprised that no dome growth took place during the last 3 years of the 1980s. Perhaps the series of eruptive episodes that began in 1980 has ended. However, in late 1989 periods of increased, though still weak, seismicity occurred, and in early December 1989 and early January 1990, at least three very small explosions deposited thin layers of ash in the crater. Perhaps these events either represent a "dying gasp" or are forerunners of continued or heightened eruptive activity. Time will tell.

Scientists making measurements inside Mount St. Helens' crater to monitor the growth of the "composite dome" 

The dome at Mount St. Helens is termed a composite dome by scientists, because it represents the net result of many eruptive events, not just one event. The dome-building process may be pictured as the periodic squeezing of an upward-pointing tube of toothpaste or caulking compound. The process is dynamic, involving the upward movement of new material, cracking and pushing aside of old material, sloughing of material from steep surfaces of the dome, and occasional small but violent explosions that blast out pieces of the dome. These processes result in earthquakes and measurable changes in shape of the dome and nearby crater floor; study of the earthquakes and changes in shape enables prediction of the onset of eruptive episodes.
At the start of 1990, the composite dome was about 3,480 feet by 2,820 feet in diameter and rose about 1,150 feet above the low point on the adjacent crater floor. It has a volume of about 97 million cubic yards, less than 3 percent of the volume of the volcano (about 3.5 billion cubic yards) removed during the landslide and lateral blast on May 18, 1980. If the dome resumes growth at its average rate of the 1980s (about 17 million cubic yards per year), it would take nearly a century to fill in the summit crater and more than 200 years to rebuild Mount St. Helens to its pre-1980 size.
 
Possible Future Behavior.
For a few intensively monitored volcanoes, scientists in recent years have greatly improved their capability to predict when and sometimes even where an eruption might take place, with lead times on the order of several days or less. For example, the current ability to predict eruptive episodes at Mount St. Helens represents a major advance; since 1980, all episodes (except for one very small event in 1984) have been successfully predicted several days to 3 weeks in advance. Even for accurately predicted eruptions, however, there is no way to anticipate their size or duration. Moreover, scientists are not yet able to forecast accurately the long-term future behavior of volcanoes. For example, scientists cannot answer with any certainty the following questions about Mount St. Helens: Is the intermittent activity of the 1980s over? Will another large explosive eruption comparable to that of May 18, 1980, take place within the next decade or even century? Will lava flows accompany future eruptions?
Most earth-science studies are concerned with past events, and the axiom that "the present is the key to the past" is fundamental to these studies. In recent years, as earth scientists have been asked repeatedly to look forward in time, the axiom that "the past and present are keys to the future" has become increasingly significant. Clues to the possible future behavior of Mount St. Helens are gleaned from its past eruptive history. During the past 50,000 years, Mount St. Helens has experienced nine "eruptive periods," not counting the activity of the 1980s. The term eruptive period is informally used by geoscientists for a segment of a volcano's eruptive history encompassing a series of eruptive episodes closely associated in time and/or type of eruptive processes or products; such periods are separated by dormant intervals, generally of longer duration.
The most recent and best known of the pre-1980 eruptive periods began with a major explosive eruption in 1800 A.D. For the next 57 years, this event was followed by intermittent relatively small explosive eruptions, lava flows, and the extrusion of a lava dome. Assuming that Mount St. Helens behaves as it did in the 19th century, the present activity could continue intermittently for years, possibly decades. Such activity could include the outpouring of lava flows (not observed to date), as well as renewed dome growth and small-to-moderate explosive events. The chance of another catastrophic landslide and blast comparable to that of May 18, 1980, is exceedingly low. The past history of the volcano suggests, however, that one or more explosive eruptions with heavy ash fall comparable to that of the May 18, 1980, eruption might occur before Mount St. Helens returns to a dormant state. This history of intermittent activity is one of the most important reasons why scientists continue to monitor the volcano to detect the intensive, sustained seismic activity and ground deformation that can be expected to accompany any massive infusion of new magma required to break the pattern of dome building in the 1980s and to feed an explosive eruption of major proportions.


View of Mount St. Helens from Johnston Ridge on March 30, 1987 (Photograph by Lyn Topinka); through April 1990, the composite dome inside the crater has not enlarged since the last eruptive period in October 1986.

Bezymianny Volcano, Kamchatka, U.S.S.R., erupted violently in March 1956 and has been intermittently active since then. This photograph, taken in 1977, shows the growing composite dome of Bezymianny rising above the crater rim. Mount St. Helens could similarly remain active for several decades, and   continuing dome growth ultimately may fill the crater to form a new conical   summit (Photograph courtesy of the Kamchatka Volcanological Station).
   
Continuing Volcanic and Hydrologic Hazards.
The continuing intermittent eruptive activity at Mount St. Helens poses volcanic and hydrologic hazards for the foreseeable future, especially if eruption frequency and vigor increase. Specific hazards--ash fall, pyroclastic flows, mudflows, and floods-were described by scientists years before they became stark realities on May 18, 1980. Since then, as the volcano settled into a pattern of episodic, moderate and generally nonexplosive activity, the severity and regional impact of ash fall, lateral blasts, and pyreclastic flows have diminished. Given Mount St. Helens' alternations between explosive and nonexplosive activity in its past, however, the possibility of violent eruptions and attendant hazards in the future should not be discounted.
Considerable hazards still exist in the immediate vicinity of the volcano's present summit--the amphitheater-like crater, with its episodically active and growing composite lava dome. Whenever the composite dome enlarges, chances increase for collapses of its steep, irregular sides. Such collapses, in turn, could hurl rock fragments onto the crater floor and possibly trigger small pyroclastic flows through the crater breach and down the north flank of the mountain toward Spirit Lake. Rockfalls from the unstable steep walls of the crater have been common since the formation of the huge crater, posing a local but significant hazard to scientists working within it. Scientists and other people working close to or within the volcano's crater--within the "restricted zone" established by the USFS-must remember these hazards and take safety precautions.

As an example of continuing hazards, mudflows triggered by the eruption of March 1982 poured down the north flank of Mount St. Helens and reached the valley of the North Fork Toutle River.
Lava flows from Mount St. Helens pose little direct hazard to people or property because such flows are likely to be sluggish and, therefore, should not move fast or far from the vent. Anyone in good health should be able to outwalk or outrun the flows, and no major civil works are near enough to the volcano to be overrun by lava flows. However, such flows can melt snow and ice and thus could cause minor debris flows, mudflows, and floods.
Given the current, relatively quiet, eruptive behavior of Mount St. Helens, debris flows and floods at present constitute the greatest hazards related to volcanic activity. The potential for mudflows and floods was increased by the existence of new ponds and lakes formed when the debris avalanche of May 1980 blocked parts of the preexisting drainage to serve as natural dams. As these natural dams are composed of loose, easily erodible volcanic debris, they are structurally weak and could fail, which would trigger mudflows and floods.

Scene at the shore of Spirit Lake showing the Army Corps of Engineers' project to control the rise of the lake level. A pump barge is at the upper left.
Devastating mudflows or floods or both could be triggered by any or all of the following: heavy rainfall during storms, melting of snow and ice by hot eruptive products (especially pyroclastic flows), or sudden failure of one of the lakes impounded by the debris avalanche deposits. During winter--the time of peak precipitation and maximum snowpack-the risks of mudflows and floods increase significiantly. Normal precipitation in the Mt. St. Helens area is heavy, especially on the volcano's upper slopes, where the average annual rainfall totals 140 inches. In a normal winter, the snowpack on the volcano's higher slopes can be about 16 feet thick. Thus, scientists and civil authorities were rightly concerned about the high potential for mudflows and floods, and the Army Corps of Engineers began to take engineering measures-including sediment-retention structures and channel dredging--in the drainages most vulnerable to mudflow and flood hazards.

The inlet of the diversionary tunnel at Spirit Lake, part of the permanent system now used to regulate lake level. The tunnel is 11 feet in diameter and 1.5 miles long. Large logs and other debris deposited by the lateral blast on   May 18, 1980, float on the lake surface around the inlet (foreground). 
As an example of the flood hazards in the Mount St. Helens region, in August 1980 the failure of a natural debris dam caused the rapid draining of a 250-acre-feet lake in the Toutle River Valley near Elk Rock. (One "acre-foot" of water is equal to the volume contained in a one-foot layer covering one acre , or about 325 thousand gallons.) The ensuing flood damaged a partially constructed sedimentretention structure and heavy channel-maintenance equipment in the North Fork of the Toutle River. Fortunately, no injuries or deaths resulted. During the next 9 months, no large floods happened, largely because no high-intensity rainfalls occurred even though the total precipitation for the winter and spring of 1980-1981 was near normal. There were no major mudflows or floods the following winter-spring, again because rainfall generally was low intensity. Meanwhile, the levels of the lakes impounded by natural dams, however, gradually rose due to rainfall and runoff.
By the fall of 1982, the debris dams for three of the largest lakes-at Spirit Lake, Coldwater Creek, and South Fork Castle Creek-were becoming substantially filled, thereby increasing the risk of catastrophic flooding should the dams fail or be overtopped. The Corps of Engineers, which in 1981 started construction of controlled outlets at Coldwater and Castle Lakes, began also to control the rise of the level of Spirit Lake by an interim plan of barge-based pumping and discharge into outlet channels. The USGS and the National Weather Service installed flood-warning systems in the Toutle and Cowlitz River Valleys. By March 1983, Spirit Lake contained 360,000 acre-feet of water, the lake at Coldwater Creek had 67,000 acre-feet, and that at South Fork Castle Creek had 1·9,000 acre-feet. Scientists and engineers estimated that a breach of the natural dam at South Fork Castle Creek, the smallest of the three lakes, could unleash mudflows and floods comparable to those triggered by the May 18, 1980, eruption of Mount St. Helens. The Corps of Engineers and other Federal, State, and county agencies initiated a variety of projects to mitigate the growing hydrologic hazards. These mitigation projects required many people and much equipment to work in the hazardous zones close to the volcano. To ensure the safety of the mitigation operations, scientists had to intensify their monitoring efforts not only of the volcano itself but also of the debris-clogged drainage systems.
Though less severe now than in the early 1980s, mudflow and flooding hazards should exist for many years, until such time as the slopes and areas around Mount St. Helens, by revegetation and normal erosion, return to or approach their pre-eruption forest cover, stream gradients, rates of flow, discharge, and channel dimensions. As part of a long-term plan to cope with the continuing hydrologic hazards, the Corps of Engineers, in April 1985, completed the construction of al.5 mile-long diversionary tunnel at Spirit Lake. This permanent tunnel system replaced the temporary, barge-based pumping operations to regulate the lake's water level.
Since May 1980, the natural recovery of the drain. age system around Mount St. Helens has been substantial. Yet, during this recovery period, some roads in the region sustained significant damage from mudflows and floods, and a number of homes were lost because of stream-bank erosion. However, much more damage would have occurred if it were not for the construction of sediment-retention structures, dredging, and other engineering mitigation measures taken by the Army Corps of Engineers. It should be emphasized, however, the recovering drainage system has not been subjected to a truly major storm during the past decade. Thus, scientists, engineers, and government officials must continue to closely assess and monitor the continuing volcanic and hydrologic hazards. Human efforts to control the floods and sedimentation are designed not only to gain time to lessen the impact of hydrologic hazards until the natural "healing" of the drainage systems around Mount St. Helens is complete, but also to try to guide, if possible, the healing process.


Aerial view of a sediment-retention structure, in the North Fork of the Toutle River, used to reduce mudflows and flood hazards (Photograph courtesy of the Army Corps of Engineers). Mount St. Helens can be seen on the skyline (upper left).
 
Scientists' ChaIlenge and Opportunity.
The eruptive activity of Mount St. Helens has provided a good test for scientists who faced the challenge of obtaining, relaying, and explaining in easily understandable terms the information needed by the Federal, State, and local officials charged with land management and public safety. It should be reemphasized, however, that a quick response at Mount St. Helens was possible only because decades of systematic research before 1980 had contributed to a good understanding of the volcano's eruptive behavior and potential hazards. Additionally, the Mount St. Helens activity also has provided scientists a unique opportunity to learn much about the dynamics of an active composite volcano. The results of studies completed and in progress have improved the understanding of eruptive mechanisms and should refine a forecasting capability not only for Mount St. Helens but also for similar volcanoes in the United States and elsewhere.

Scientists of the David A. Johnston Cascades Volcano Observatory (CVO) collecting gas samples in Mount St. Helens as part of the geochemical monitoring program (Photograph by Kathy Cashman).
When the 4.2-magnitude earthquake occurred on March 20, 1980, seismologists of the University of Washington and the USGS began a round-the-clock effort to expand the monitoring and to evaluate the seismic activity. As the number of earthquakes in creased over the next few days, USGS and other scientists discussed with officials of the Gifford Pin chot National Forest the significance of the seismic activity, the safety of USFS facilities near the volcano, and the need to close its upper slopes because of snow avalanche and other hazards. USGS scientist Donal Mullineaux arrived on the scene the evening of March 25, and an emergency coordination center was set up at the USFS headquarters in Vancouver. The next day, Mullineaux-one of the foremost experts on Mount St. Helens-described the possible types of eruptions and associated volcanic hazards at a meeting of representatives from government and industry. Following the meeting, the USFS, State, and county officials decided to extend the area of closure beyond the immediate flanks of the volcano. The same day (March 26), the general nature of potential eruptive activity and volcanic hazards was discussed again at a joint USFS-USGS press conference. An official announcement of a Hazard Watch for Mount St. Helens was issued by the USGS at 8 a.m. PST on March 27. By 12:36 p.m. that day, the first eruption of Mount St. Helens in over a century had begun.
By the time the eruptive activity was into its second week, 25 to 30 scientists were on hand carrying out a wide variety of monitoring and volcanic-hazard-assessment studies. These scientists participated in daily meetings and briefings with USFS and other officials and provided advice on the locations of hazardous zones for use, such as the selection of sites for roadblocks to control access around the volcano. All decisions regarding access and restricted areas, however, were the sole responsibility of the USFS, State of Washington, and other land managers for the Mount St. Helens region. Ironically, in 1980 the section of land containing the summit crater was owned by the Burlington Northern Railroad; it has since been acquired by USFS by land exchanges. On March 31, an onsite, comprehensive, volcanic-hazards assessment was presented at another meeting of agencies responsible for public safety. On April 1, a large-scale volcanic-hazards map was prepared for use by these agencies. A news release was issued by the USGS on what might be expected should the activity develop into a "major eruptive phase." Scientists contributed geotechnical and volcanichazards information essential for preparing the "Mount St. Helens Contingency Plan" issued by the USFS on April 9. Although the possibility that the collapse of the rapidly deforming "bulge" on the north flank could trigger a magmatic eruption was considered and discussed with officials at various meetings in late April, scientists could not be sure that such an event would actually occur, let alone estimate its timing or size.The early recognition of the potential hazards of the bulge on Mount St. Helens' north slope and the systematic measurement of its extremely rapid growth led scientists to advise the USFS that hazards were increasing. Accordingly, the USFS, State, and county officials enforced closure zones. Had these access-control measures not been taken, the catastrophic events of May 18 would have resulted in considerably more human deaths and injury. An element of luck also saved many lives. The catastrophe began hours before the scheduled departure of a caravan of landowners permitted by officials to enter the controlled access area to inspect their properties and cabins. Also, had the eruption occurred on any other day than Sunday, many more people authorized to enter the restricted areas (such as loggers, USFS personnel, and government officials) would have been at work and exposed to the danger.
Legislation passed by Congress in 1974 made the Geoiogical Survey the lead Federal agency responsible for providing reliable and timely warnings of volcanic hazards to State and local authorities. Under this mandate, and recognizing the need to maintain systematic surveillance of Mount St. Helens' continuing activity, the USGS established a permanent regional office at Vancouver, Washington, after the May 18, 1980, eruption. On May 18, 1982, the office at Vancouver was formally designated the David A. Johnston Cascades Volcano Observatory (CVO), in memory of the Survey volcanologist killed 2 years earlier. Staffed by about 90 permanent and part-time employees-geologists, geophysicists, hydrologists, geochemists, technicians, and supporting personnel-the CVO not only maintains a close watch on Mount St. Helens but also serves as the headquarters for monitoring other volcanoes of the Cascade Range in Washington, Oregon, and northern California. In recent years, the CVO staff has also participated in studies of eruptions or unrest at other volcanoes in the western United States and elsewhere in the world. The Cascades Volcano Observatory is a sister observatory to two other volcano observatories operated by the USGS: the Hawaiian Volcano Observatory, founded in 1912, has pioneered or refined most of the modern volcano-monitoring methods used in the world today; and the Alaska Volcano Observatory, established jointly by the USGS and the state of Alaska in 1988, studies the volcanoes of the Alaskan Peninsula and Aleutian Islands.
CVO scientist making a ground-deformation measure- ment as a small explosion takes place. This photograph shows the laser beam transmitter positioned atop a heavy 12-foot-high steel tower centered over a benchmark used as the mea surement reference point. Such towers allow measure ments to be made at Mount St.Helens during the winter despite deep snow (Photo graph by Lyn Topinka).

Throughout the 1980s, the ability of scientists at CVO and the University of Washington to provide warnings for dome-building eruptive episodes has been exceptional. Indeed, for all episodes (except for one small event) since May 1980, scientistsusing data from seismic, ground deformation, and volcanic gas monitoring-have provided reliable forecasts from several hours to several days, even weeks, in advance of these events. The table (p. 50) gives a typical example of the timely information for one 1982 eruption given to government officials charged with emergency management and to the general public via news releases.

Sketch map showing the close-in monitoring network at Mount St. Helens. The seismic network, jointly operated by the USGS and the University of Washington, covers an area much larger than that shown in the diagram--encompassing the entire State of Washington. EDM stands for electronic distance-monitoring.
At Mount St. Helens, the track record for predicting eruptions, especially dome-building ones, is better than any previously accomplished for any volcano in the world. Our improving predictive ability, however, has not been tested by any large explosive eruptions.

August 18-23, 1982, Eruption of Mount St. Helens.
Extended Outlook Advisory.
1 p.m., July 30 "an eruption will probably begin within the next 3 weeks." 
". . . the eruption will consist primarily of dome growth."
Advisory Update.
11:30 a.m., August 16 "eruption will begin within the next 4 days, possibly within 2 days . . . the eruption will consist primarily of dome growth, but as with all dome growth, minor explosive activity is also possible."
Eruption Alert
6:55 a.m., August 17 "Seismicity and rates of deformation in the crater have acceleratej sharply . . . the expected eruption will probably begin within the next 24 hours."
Updated Eruption Alert.
7:45 a.m., August 18"The dome is already growing internally, but we have not seen any discrete event yet, for example, an explosion, a change in the character of seismicity or deformation . . . or gas emissions, that in other eruptions has signaled the onset of . . . eruptions. We still expect lava to eventually work its way through the dome and to be extruded as a new lobe on the surface of the dome."
Eruption Update.
7:15 p.m., August 18"Lava finally broke through to the top of the dome this morning, and a new lobe is flowing slowly onto the western and southern sides of the dome."
End-of-eruption Advisory.
8:45 p.m., August 23"Deformation and gas emissions have returned to their background levels, so this eruption is essentiaily over. Minor sagging and spreading of the new lobe may continue for a few days, accompanied by occasional rockfalls and dust plumes. "

 
Mount St. Helens has provided, and will continue to provide, an unprecedented opportunity for scientific research on volcanism. Relatively easy accessibility and a dense network of monitoring instruments have made Mount St. Helens a natural laboratory at which scientists can study processes typical of volcanoes elsewhere along the circum-Pacific "Ring of Fire." As Mount St. Helens is monitored continuously before, during, and after each eruptive episode, and its eruptive products are regularly sampled for chemical and other laboratory analyses, the information being compiled and interpreted yields a better understanding of Mount St. Helens in particular, and other composite volcanoes in general. Moreover, the monitoring techniques now being used at Mount St. Helens and other Cascade volcanoes are the same as, or variations of, those used to monitor the active Hawaiian volcanoes. Thus, in the rather young science of volcanology, there is a rare opportunity to compare the effectiveness of these techniques on two contrasting kinds of volcanoes--the Hawaiian shield volcanoes, which typically erupt nonexplosively, and the Cascade composite volcanoes, which typically erupt explosively. Scientists have learned that data from all types of monitoring are helpful regardless of the type of volcano. From such comparative studies, they will be able to determine which techniques are the most effective and reliable for monitoring each type of volcano. With such tools and broadened knowledge, scientists may be entering a new epoch in volcanology, in which significant advances in understanding volcanic phenomena will be achieved, accompanied by a sharpened ability to forecast and mitigate volcanic hazards.
 
Mount St. Helens National Volcanic Monument.
Despite the troubled economy in early 1980s, tens of thousands of visitors flocked to the area surrounding Mount St. Helens to marvel at the effects of the eruption. On August 27, 1982, President Reagan signed into law a measure setting aside 110,000 acres around the volcano as the Mount St. Helens National Volcanic Monument, the nation's first such monument managed by the USFS. At dedication ceremonies on May 18, 1983, Max Peterson, head of the USFS, said,"we can take pride in having preserved the unique episode of natural history for future generations." Since then, many trails, viewpoints, information stations, campgrounds, and picnic areas have been established to accommodate the increasing number of visitors each year. Beginning in the summer of 1983, visitors have been able to drive to Windy Ridge, only 4 miles northeast of the crater. From this spectacular vantage point overlooking Spirit Lake, people see firsthand not only the awesome evidence of a volcano's destruction, but also the remarkable, gradual recovery of the land as revegetation proceeds and wildlife returns.

The U.S. Forest Service Mount St. Helens Visitor Center near Silver Lake, Washington (Photograph by Jim Quiring, USFS Mount St. Helens Volcanic National Monument).
Mountain climbing to the summit of the volcano has been allowed since 1986, and winter exploration of the crater itself is a difficult but rewarding adventure. A majestic Visitor Center was completed in December 1986 at Silver Lake, about 30 miles west of Mount St. Helens and a few miles east of Interstate Highway 5; by the end of 1989, the Center had hosted more than 1.5 million visitors. 
Scheduled for opening in 1992 or 1993 is an interpretation complex in the Coldwater Lake-Johnston Ridge area, from which visitors will be able to view the inside of the crater and its dome from the site of David Johnston's camp on the morning of May 18, 1980.
The National Volcanic Monument preserves some of the best examples and sites affected by volcanic events for scientific studies, education, and recreation. Intensive monitoring of the volcano is now all the more important to ensure the safety of the scientists and the monument's visitors.

Selected Viewings and Readings.
Selected Viewings.
The best way to see the effects and products of the volcano's activity is to visit the Mount St. Helens National Volcanic Monument. The next best thing is to view movies, videos, or slides about the volcano, some of which are listed here. Some school and public libraries might have them in their collections.
 
Mount St. Helens, A General Slide Set, produced by the U.S. Geological Survey; inquiries about availability should be addressed to the Cascades Volcano Observatory, 5400 MacArthur Boulevard, Vancouver, Washington 98661. (A set of 50 slides with descriptive text, covering the eruption on May 18, 1980, and its aftermath, "before" and "after" comparisons, the growth of the lava dome, and the geologic and hydrologic studies by USGS scientists.)
Mount St. Helens, Past and Present, Beechwood Films, P.O. Box 16384, Portland, Oregon 97233. (While it contains no footage of the activity on May 18, 1980, this 40-minute video presents an interestiny comparison of the areas around Mount St. Helens before and after the eruption.)
Mount St. Helens, The Turmoil of Creation Continues, produced by Panorama International Productions and available from the Pacific Northwest National Parks and Forests Association, 83 South King Street, Seattle, Washington 98104. (A 90-minute video documenting the events leading to, during, and after the catastrophic eruption on May 18, 1980.)
This Place in Time: The Mount St. Helens Story, a Film Loft production available (by borrowing only) from Film Distribution Center, 13500 NE 124th Street, Suite 2, Kirkland, Washington 98034, (206) 820-2592. (A 22-minute, 16-mm movie highlighting the reawakening of Mount St. Helens and its eruptive activity.)


This small tree, protected by a snowbank, survived the devastation in the lateral-blast zone and remains among the vegetation beginning to grow on the scarred land. 
   
Selected Readings.
Brantley, Steven, and Topinka, Lyn, 1984, Volcanic studies at the U.S. Geological Survey's David A. Johnston Cascades Volcano Observatory, Vancouver, Washington: Earthquake Information Bulletin, v. 16, no. 2, p.41-120. [A well-illustrated report of the activities and workings of the Observatory, which was established in 1981 as sister observatory to the Hawaiian Volcano Observatory (see Heliker and others, 1986).]
Crandell, D. R., and Mullineaux, D, R., 1978, Potential hazards from future eruptions of Mount St. Helens, Washington: U.S. Geological Survey Bulletin 1383-C, 26 p. (Description of the types of eruptions and associated volcanic hazards from Mount St. Helens--which proved to be remarkably close to what actually took place 2 years later.)
Crandell, D. R., Mullineaux, D. R., and Rubin, Meyer, 1975, Mount St. Helens Volcano: Recent and future behavior: Science, v. 187, no. 4175, p. 438- 441. (First publication to forecast that Mount St. Helens could erupt " before the end of the century.")
Decker, R.W., and Decker, Barbara, 1989, Volcanoes: W.H. Freeman and Company, New York, 285 p. (An information-packed introduction to the study of volcanoes written in an easy-to-read style.)
Editors, 1982, Volcano: in the series Planet Earth, Time-Life Books, Alexandria, Virginia, 176 p. (A well illustrated and readable general survey of volcanoes and their activity.)
Foxworthy, B. L., and Hill, Mary, 1982, Volcanic eruptions of 1980 at Mount St. Helens: The first 100 days: U.S. Geological Survey Professional Paper 1249, 125 p. (A description of the events during the first 100 days of eruptive activity, in nontechnical language, that serves as a backdrop for the scientific articles in USGS Professional Paper 1250.)
Harris, S.L., 1988, Fire Mountains of the West: The Cascade and Mono Lake Volcanoes: Mountain Press Publishing Company, Missoula, Montana, 379 p. (This is the revised and updated version of his Fire and Ice, a classic summary of the volcanoes of the Cascade Range, including Mount St. Helens.)
Heliker, Christina, Griggs, J.D., Takahashi, T.J., and Wright, T.L., 1986, Volcano monitoring at the U.S. Geological Survey's Hawaiian Volcano Observatory: Earthquakes and Volcanoes (formerly Earthquake Information Bulletin), v. 18, no. 1, 72 p. (An informative and richly illustrated article on the monitoring and research activities of the Observatory that was founded in 1912.)
Lipman, P. W., and Mullineaux, D. R., editors, 1981, The 1980 eruptions of Mount St. Helens, Washington: U.S. Geological Survey Professional Paper 1250, 844 p. (The most comprehensive collection of scientific articles available to date, containing 62 reports on diverse aspects of the 1980 eruptions.)
Mullineaux, D. R., 1981, Hazards from volcanic eruptions, in Hays, W. W., ed., Facing geologic and hydrologic hazards: Earth-science considerations: U. S. Geological Survey Professional Paper 1240-B, p. B86-B101. (A well-illustrated introduction to the types, frequency, and mitigation of volcanic hazards.)
Simkin, Tom, Tilling, R.I., Taggart, J.N., Jones, W.J., and Spall, Henry, compilers, 1989, This dynamic planet: World Map of volcanoes, earthquakes, and plate tectonics: U.S. Geological Survey, Reston, Virginia, prepared in cooperation with the Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C. (scale 1:30,000,000 at equator). (This full color, computer-generated map shows the Earth's physiographic features overlain by its volcanoes, earthquake epicenters, and relative movement of its major tectonic plates, along the boundaries of which most of the world's volcanoes and earthquake occur.)
Tilling, R. I., 1977, Monitoring active volcanoes, in U.S. Geological Survey Yearbook, Fiscal Year 1977, p. 36-40. (A generalized introduction to the common techniques of volcano monitoring. Also available as a booklet in the USGS series of general interest publications.)
------1982, Volcanoes, U.S. Geological Survey series of general interest publications, 46 p. (A general summary of the nature, types, workings, products, and hazards of volcanoes.)
Tilling, R.I., Heliker, Christina, and Wright, T.L., 1987, Eruptions of Hawaiian volcanoes: Past, present, and future: U.S. Geological Survey series of general interest publications, 54 p. (A nontechnical summary, illustrated by many color photographs, of the abundant data on the processes and products of Hawaiian volcanoes; similar in format to this book.)

<#HOW>
*
How Volcanoes work.
Eruption Dynamics.
This section examines the variability of volcanic environments and the physical and chemical controls on eruption dynamics. Environments of volcanism are discussed in terms of plate tectonic theory.

VOLCANO-TECTONIC ENVIRONMENTS.
DISTRIBUTION OF ACTIVE VOLCANOES.
The earth is a dynamic planet. Its rigid outer surface layer is broken into several tectonic plates which are in constant motion relative to one another. As demonstrated in the world map below, most of the  550 active volcanoes on earth are located along the margins of adjacent plates.
Tectonic plates are composed of lithosphere, the rigid outer portion of the earth. With a thickness of about 100 km, the lithosphere is composed of an upper layer of crust (~7 km thick under the oceans, and ~50 km thick under the continents) and a lower, denser layer of the earth's upper mantle. The lithosphere is underlain by the asthenosphere, a hot, mobile layer of partially molten rock lying within the earth's upper mantle.
Eruptions on the surface of the earth are driven by magma (molten rock), which is derived by melting at depth. The various magma types are described in Physicochemical Controls on Eruption Style. Magma types vary from mafic, intermediate, to felsic as their silica (SiO2) content increases. Mafic (basaltic) magmas are generated directly from the mantle, either within the asthenosphere or within the overlying mantle lithosphere. Many mafic-to-intermediate (basaltic-to-andesitic) magmas appear to be derived from the melting of hydrated lithospheric mantle. More differentiated, intermediate-to-felsic magmas, on the other hand, are partly derived from the melting of continental crust by hot, mafic magmas that either pond at the crust-mantle boundary, or intrude into the overlying continents where they reside in magma chambers located at various crustal levels.
Volcanism is typically widespread along plate boundaries. Although volcanism in the interior of plates is less common, these intraplate regions can also generate voluminous eruptive products. The regional volcano-tectonic processes associated with plate-boundary environments and intraplate environments are described in more detail below.
World map showing plate boundaries (blue lines), the distribution of recent earthquakes (yellow dots) and active volcanoes (red triangles). 
VOLCANISM AND PLATE TECTONICS.
Plate boundaries mark the sites where two plates are either moving away from one another, moving toward one another, or sliding past one another. Adjacent plates are delineated by three types of boundaries defined by this relative motion:
Divergent plate boundaries -- Plates diverge from one another at the site of thermally buoyant mid-oceanic ridges. Oceanic crust is created at divergent plate boundaries. 
Convergent plate boundaries -- Plates converge on one another at the site of deep oceanic trenches. Oceanic crust is destroyed at convergent plate boundaries. 
Transform plate boundaries -- Plates slide past one another.
Although volcanism is abundant at divergent and convergent plate boundaries, there is a distinct lack of significant volcanism associated with transform plate boundaries. Spreading center volcanism occurs at divergent plate margins, and subduction zone volcanism occurs at convergent plate margins. Intraplate volcanism describes volcanic eruptions within tectonic plates. Each of these three volcano-tectonic environments is depicted in the following diagram:
SPREADING CENTER VOLCANISM
Spreading center volcanism occurs at the site of mid-oceanic ridges, where two plates diverge from one another. As the plates are pulled apart, hot asthenosphere rises upward to fill voids of the extended lithosphere. The rise of this hot mantle provides thermal buoyancy to the ridge area and this is the reason that they stand as high ridges in the center of ocean basins. This is demonstrated in the colored relief images shown here.
As the hot asthenosphere rises to shallow levels, it decompresses and melts to produce basalt magmas. These magmas pond in crustal magma chambers where they are periodically tapped by vertical fractures that provide conduits for the rapid rise of magma to the surface. The eruptions produced in this manner are typically fissure eruptions. The erupting basalt can generate vast submarine lava fields. Typically, the lava quenches quickly against the bottom waters to produce characteristic bulbous shapes called pillow basalt.
The high heat content of mid-ocean ridges is evident from the occurrence of numerous hydrothermal vents. These form from surface water that seeps downward through cracks where it heated by hot rocks lying above the magma chambers. These hot thermal waters then ascend back through the overlying crust, where they leach out silica and numerous metals from the basaltic lava. The hot springs created at the surface are called a black smokers because they are readily identified by billowing dark clouds composed of metal-rich fluids.
As basaltic lava erupts at the surface, more or less continuously for millions of years, it is constantly accreted onto the edge of the spreading plates as it cools into a hardened basalt layer. This process generates oceanic crust. Oceanic crust is youngest near the ridge, but it becomes progressively older away from the spreading center due to divergence of the plates over time. This age progression is demonstrated in the image below.
Whereas oceanic crust is generated at divergent plate margins, it is consumed at convergent plate margins. For a more detailed description of volcanism at convergent plate boundaries and intraplate settings, link to:
Age of the Atlantic oceanic crust. The crust near the continental margins (blue) is about 200 million years old. It gets progressively younger toward the mid-Atlantic ridge, where oceanic crust is forming today. Courtesy of NOAA.
SUBDUCTION ZONE VOLCANISM.
The most volcanically active belt on Earth is known as the Ring of Fire, a region of subduction zone volcanism surrounding the Pacific Ocean. Subduction zone volcanism occurs where two plates are converging on one another. One plate containing oceanic lithosphere descends beneath the adjacent plate, thus consuming the oceanic lithosphere into the earth's mantle. This on-going process is called subduction. As the descending plate bends downward at the surface, it creates a large linear depression called an oceanic trench. These trenches are the deepest topographic features on the earth's surface. The deepest, 11 kilometers below sealevel, is the Mariana trench, which lies along the western margin of the Ring of Fire. Another example, forming the northern rim of the Ring of Fire, is the Aleutian trench shown here: 
The Pacific plate descends into the mantle at the site of the Aleutian trench. Subduction zone volcanism here has generated the Aleutian island chain of active volcanoes.
The crustal portion of the subducting slab contains a significant amount of surface water, as well as water contained in hydrated minerals within the seafloor basalt. As the subducting slab descends to greater and greater depths, it progressively encounters greater temperatures and greater pressures which cause the slab to release water into the mantle wedge overlying the descending plate. Water has the effect of lowering the melting temperature of the mantle, thus causing it to melt. The magma produced by this mechanism varies from basalt to andesite in composition. It rises upward to produce a linear belt of volcanoes parallel to the oceanic trench, as exemplified in the above image of the Aleutian Island chain. The chain of volcanoes is called an island arc. If the oceanic lithosphere subducts beneath an adjacent plate of continental lithosphere, then a similar belt of volcanoes will be generated on continental crust. This belt is then called a volcanic arc, examples of which include the Cascade volcanic arc of the U.S. Pacific northwest, and the Andes volcanic arc of South America.
The volcanoes produced by subduction zone volcanism are typically stratovolcanoes. Incipient island arcs tend to be more basaltic in composition, whereas mature continental volcanic arcs tend to be more andesitic in composition.
INTRAPLATE (HOTSPOT) VOLCANISM.
Although most volcanic rocks are generated at plate boundaries, there are a few exceptionally active sites of volcanism within the plate interiors. These intraplate regions of voluminous volcanism are called hotspots. Twenty-four selected hotspots are shown on the adjacent map. Most hotspots are thought to be underlain by a large plume of anomalously hot mantle. These mantle plumes appear to be generated in the lower mantle and rise slowly through the mantle by convection. Experimental data suggests that they rise as a plastically deforming mass that has a bulbous head fed by a long, narrow tail. As the head impinges on the base of the lithosphere, it spreads outward into a mushroom shape. Such plume heads are thought to have diameters between ~500 to ~1000 km. Decompressional melting of this hot mantle source can generate huge volumes of basalt magma. It is thought that the massive flood basalt provinces on earth are produced above mantle hotspots. Although most geologists accept the hotspot concept, the number of hotspots worldwide is still a matter of controversy.
The Pacific plate contains several linear belts of extinct submarine volcanoes, called seamounts, an example of which is the Foundation seamount chain shown here.
The formation of at least some of these intraplate seamount chains can be attributed to volcanism above a mantle hotspot to form a linear, age-progressive hotspot track. Mantle plumes appear to be largely unaffected by plate motions. As lithospheric plates move across stationary hotspots, volcanism will generate volcanic islands that are active above the mantle plume, but become inactive and progressively older as they move away from the mantle plume in the direction of plate movement. Thus, a linear belt of inactive volcanic islands and seamounts will be produced. A classic example of this mechanism is demonstrated by the Hawaiian and Emperor seamount chains. The image on the left shows the Hawaiian and Emperor seamount chains. The Hawaiian chain begins at the Hawaiian Islands, to the southeast, and continues to the bend located ~5000 km to the northwest. From the bend, the Emperor chain continues to the north-northwest until it terminates at the Aleutian trench. The diagram on the right is a model demonstrating how these chains form above the stationary mantle plume, becoming progressively older to the northwest .
The "Big Island" of Hawaii lies above the mantle plume. It is the only island that is currently volcanically active. The seven Hawaiian Islands become progressively older to the northwest. The main phase of volcanism on Oahu ceased about 3 million years ago, and on Kauai about 5 million years ago. This trend continues beyond the Hawaiian Islands, as demonstrated by a string of seamounts (the Hawaiian chain) that becomes progressively older toward Midway Island. Midway is composed of lavas that are ~27 million years old. Northwest of Midway, the volcanic belt bends to the north-northwest to form the Emperor seamount chain. Here, the seamounts become progressively older until they terminate against the Aleutian trench. The oldest of these seamounts near the trench is ~70 million years old. This implies that the mantle plume currently generating basaltic lavas on the Big Island has been in existence for at least 70 million years!
The Hawaiians were very good at recognizing the difference in the older, eroded volcanic islands and newer islands to the southeast, where volcanic features are more pristine. Legend has it that Pele, the Hawaiian goddess of fire, was forced from island to island as she was chased by vairous gods. Her journey is marked by volcanic eruptions, as she progressed from the island of Kaua'i to her current home on the Big Island. The legend corresponds well with the modern scientific notion of the age progression of these volcanic islands.
PHYSICOCHEMICAL CONTROLS ON ERUPTION STYLE
There is a great range in the explosivity of volcanic eruptions. Many eruptions are relatively quiescent and are characterized by the calm, nonviolent extrusion of lava flows on the earth's surface. Other eruptions, however, are highly explosive and are characterized by the violent ejection of fragmented volcanic debris, called tephra, which can extend tens of kilometers into the atmosphere above the volcano.
Whether or not an eruption falls into one of these end-member types depends on a variety of factors, which are ultimately linked to the composition of the magma (molten rock) underlying the volcano. Magma composition is discussed below, followed by a description of the controlling factors on explosivity -- viscosity, temperature, and the amount of dissolved gases in the magma.
MAGMA COMPOSITION AND ROCK TYPES.
Only ten elements make up the bulk of most magmas: oxygen (O), silicon (Si), aluminum (Al), iron (Fe), magnesium (Mg), titanium (Ti) calcium (Ca), sodium (Na), potassium (K), and phosphorous (P). Because oxygen and silicon are by far the two most abundant elements in magma, it is convenient to describe the different magma types in terms of their silica content (SiO2). The magma types vary from mafic magmas, which have relatively low silica and high Fe and Mg contents, to felsic magmas, which have relatively high silica and low Fe and Mg contents. Mafic magma will cool and crystallize to produce the volcanic rock basalt, whereas felsic magma will crystallize to produce dacite and rhyolite. Intermediate-composition magmas will crystallize to produce the rock andesite. Because the mafic rocks are enriched in Fe and Mg, they tend to be darker colored than the felsic rock types.
ERUPTION VARIABILITY.
FREQUENCY AND SIZE.
There are about 550 volanoes on earth that have erupted in historic times. Such volcanoes are considered to be geologically active (see: What is an "acitve" volcano?). In addition, there are an equivalent number of dormant volcanoes that have not erupted in historic time, but have erupted in the past 10,000 years. Both dormat and "active" volcanoes have the potential to erupt again. On any given day, there are about ten volcanoes that are actively erupting.
Eruptions are highly variable in size and explosiveness. As the table below demonstrates, small eruptions are more frequent than larger eruptions. It takes a greater amount of time to build up the necessary gas pressures needed for the larger eruptions. The global frequency of small eruptions, producing 0.001 to .01 cubic kilometers of volcanic material, is once every few months, whereas the frequency of very large eruptions, producing thousands of cubic kilometers of ash, is about once every 100,000 years. The last truly giant eruption on earth occurred at the Toba volcano on Sumatra 74,000 years ago. It produced ~2,800 cubic kilometers of ash, more than 2000 times the amount generated by the 1980 eruption of Mt. St. Helens!

*
VOLCANO LANDFORMS.
Volcanic landscapes contain diverse landforms. The most recognizable of these include volcano edifices, calderas, and lava domes. Each of these landforms can vary markedly in size, shape, composition, and eruptive history.
VOLCANO TYPES.
GENERIC FEATURES.
A volcanic vent is an opening exposed on the earth's surface where volcanic material is emitted. All volcanoes contain a central vent underlying the summit crater of the volcano. The volcano's cone-shaped structure, or edifice, is built by the more-or-less symmetrical accumulation of lava and/or pyroclastic material around this central vent system. The central vent is connected at depth to a magma chamber, which is the main storage area for the eruptive material. Because volcano flanks are inherently unstable, they often contain fractures that descend downward toward the central vent, or toward a shallow-level magma chamber. Such fractures may occasionally tap the magma source and act as conduits for flank eruptions along the sides of the volcanic edifice. These eruptions can generate cone-shaped accumulations of volcanic material, called parasitic cones. Fractures can also act as conduits for escaping volcanic gases, which are released at the surface through vent openings called fumaroles.
MAIN VOLCANO TYPES.
Although every volcano has a unique eruptive history, most can be grouped into three main types based largely on their eruptive patterns and their general forms. The form and composition of the three main volcano types are summarized here:
Volcano type: scoria cone, shield volcano, stratovolcano
Eruption type : Strombolian, Hawaiian, Plinian.
Lava and tephra can erupt from vents other than these three main volcano types. A fissure eruption, for example, can generate huge volumes of basalt lava; however, this type of eruption is not associated with the construction of a volcanic edifice around a single central vent system. Although point-source eruptions can generate such features as spatter cones and hornitos, these volcanic edifices are typically small, localized, and/or associated with rootless eruptions (i.e., eruptions above the surface of an active lavaflow, unconnected to an overlying magma chamber) . Vent types related to hydrovolcanic processes generate unique volcanic structures, discussed separately under hydrovolcanic eruptions.
WHEN IS A VOLCANO CONSIDERED ACTIVE, DORMANT, OR EXTINCT?
Classifying a volcano as active, dormant, or extinct is a subjective and inexact exercise. A volcano is generally considered active if it has erupted in historic time. This definition, however, is rather ambiguous, because recorded history varies from thousands of years in Europe and the Middle East, to only a few hundred years in other regions of the world, like the Pacific Northwest of the United States. Scientists generally consider a volcano active if it is currently erupting, or exhibiting unrest through earthquakes, uplift, and/or new gas emissions. The Smithsonian Institution's catalog of active volcanoes, recognizes 539 volcanoes with historic eruptions. In addition, there are 529 volcanoes that have not erupted in historic times, but which exhibit clear evidence of eruption in the past 10,000 years. These latter volcanoes are probably best considered "dormat," since they have the potential to erupt again.
Whether or not inactive volcanoes are considered truly extinct, or just dormant, depends partly on the average repose interval between eruptions. As noted in eruptive variability, explosive eruptions like those at Toba and Yellowstone have repose intervals of hundreds of thousands of years, whereas non-explosive eruptions have very short repose intervals. Thus, the Yellowstone region, which has not experienced an eruption for 70,000 years, can not be considered extinct. In fact, many scientists consider Yellowstone to be active because of high uplift rates, frequent earthquakes, and a very active geothermal system. Many inactive scoria cones, on the other hand, may be viewed as extinct shortly after they erupt, because such volcanoes are typically monogenetic and only erupt once.
SCORIA CONES.
Scoria cones, also known as cinder cones, are the most common type of volcano. They are also the smallest type, with heights generally less than 300 meters. They can occur as discrete volcanoes on basaltic lava fields, or as parasitic cones generated by flank eruptions on shield volcanoes and stratovolcanoes. Scoria cones are composed almost wholly of ejected basaltic tephra. The tephra is most commonly of lapilli size, although bomb-size fragments and lava spatter may also be present. The tephra fragments typically contain abundant gas bubbles (vesicles), giving the lapilli and bombs a cindery (or scoriaceous) appearance. The tephra accumulates as scoria-fall deposits which build up around the vent to form the volcanic edifice. The edifice has very steep slopes, up to 35 degrees, although older eroded scoria cones typically have gentler slopes, from 15 to 20 degrees. Unlike the other two main volcano types, scoria cones have straight sides and very large summit craters, with respect to their relatively small edifices. They are often symmetric, although many are asymmetric due to (1) the build up of tephra on the downwind flank of the edifice, (2) elongation of the volcano above an eruptive fissure, or (3) partial rafting of an outer wall of the volcano due to basalt lava oozing outward from beneath the volcano edifice. Where scoria cones have been breached, they typically reveal red-oxidized interiors.
Scoria cones are generated by Strombolian eruptions, which produce eruptive columns of basalt tephra generally only a few hundred meters high. Many scoria cones are monogenetic in that they only erupt once, in contrast to shield volcanoes and stratovolcanoes. An exception is the Cerro Negro volcano in Nicaragua, which is the Earth's most historically active scoria cone. It is one of several parasitic cones on the northwest flank of Las Pilas volcano. Cerro Negro has erupted more than twenty times since it was born in 1850. Its most recent eruptions were in 1992 and 1995.
SHIELD VOLCANOES.
Shield volcanoes are broad, low-profile features with basal diameters that vary from a few kilometers to over 100 kilometers (e.g., the Mauna Loa volcano, Hawaii). Their heights are typically about 1/20th of their widths. The lower slopes are often gentle (2-3 degrees), but the middle slopes become steeper (~10 degrees) and then flatten at the summit. This gives shield volcanoes a flank morphology that is convex in an upward direction. Their overall broad shapes result from the extrusion of very fluid (low viscosity) basalt lava that spreads outward from the summit area, in contrast to the vertical accumulation of airfall tephra around scoria-cone vents, and the build-up of viscous lava and tephra around stratovolcanoes. Cross-sections through shield volcanoes reveal numerous thin flow units of pahoehoe basalt, typically < 1 m thick. Pyroclastic deposits are minor (< 1%) and of limited dispersal, generally from flank eruptions associated with parasitic scoria cones, or from rare, localized hydrovolcanic eruptions.
The Mauna Loa volcano on the Big Island of Hawaii, seen here in both a oblique and satellite views, is the world's largest shield volcano:
Shield volcanoes are generated by Hawaiian eruptions. However, there is some variability in their eruptive style, which translates into variations in shield morphology and size. The almost perfect symmetry and small volume (~15 km3) of Icelandic shields, for example, stands in marked contrast to the elongation and huge volume (thousands of km3) of Hawaiian shields. These variations are largely attributed to the monogenetic, small-volume, centralized summit eruptions, typical of icelandic shields, and the polygenetic, large-volume, linear fissure eruptions, typical of most hawaiian shields. Still different are the symmetrical Galapagos shields, shown below, which have steep middle slopes (>10 degrees) and flat tops occupied by large and very deep calderas. These shield types appear to be generated by ring-fracture eruptions, which delineate the sides of the caldera and mark the site of caldera collapse.

STRATOVOLCANOES.
Stratovolcanoes, also known as composite cones, are the most picturesque and the most deadly of the volcano types. Their lower slopes are gentle, but they rise steeply near the summit to produce an overall morphology that is concave in an upward direction. The summit area typically contains a surprisingly small summit crater. This classic stratovolcano shape is exemplified by many well-known stratovolcanoes, such as Mt. Fuji in Japan, Mt. Mayon in the Philippines, and Mt. Agua in Guatemala.
In detail, however, stratovolcano shapes are more variable than these classic examples, primarily because of wide variations in eruptive style and composition. Some may contain several eruptive centers, a caldera, or perhaps an amphitheater as the result of a lateral blast (e.g., Mt. St. Helens). Typically, stratovolcanoes have a layered or stratified appearance with alternating lava flows, airfall tephra, pyroclastic flows, volcanic mudflows (lahars), and/or debris flows. The compositional spectrum of these rock types may vary from basalt to rhyolite in a single volcano; however, the overall average composition of stratovolcanoes is andesitic. Many oceanic stratovolcanoes tend to be more mafic than their continental counterparts. The variability of stratovolcanoes is evident when examining the eruptive history of individual volcanoes. Mt. Fuji and Mt. Etna, for example, are dominanted by basaltic lava flows, whereas Mt. Rainier is dominated by andesitic lava, Mt. St. Helens by andesitic-to-dacitic pyroclastic material, and Mt. Lassen by dacitic lava domes.
Stratovolcanoes typically form at convergent plate margins, where one plate descends beneath an adjacent plate at the site of a subduction zone. Examples of subduction-related stratovolcanoes can be found in many places in the world, but they are particularly abundant along the rim of the Pacific Ocean, a region known as Ring of Fire. In the Americas, the Ring of Fire includes stratovolcanoes forming the Aleutian islands in Alaska, the crest of the Cascade Mountains in the Pacific Northwest, and the high peaks of the Andes Mounains in South America. A satellite view of three stratovolcanoes from the Andes is shown here:
The eruptive history of most stratovolcanoes is delineated by highly explosive Plinian eruptions. These dangerous eruptions are often associated with deadly pyroclastic flows composed of hot volcanic fragments and toxic gases that advance down slopes at hurricane-force speeds. Like shield volcanoes, stratovolcanoes are polygenetic; however, they differ from shield volcanoes in that they erupt infrequently, with typical repose intervals of hundreds of years between eruptions. Most active stratovolcanoes worldwide appear to be < 100,000 years old, although some, like Mt. Rainier, may be more than 1 million years old.
CALDERAS.
When an erupting volcano empties a shallow-level magma chamber, the edifice of the volcano may collapse into the voided reservoir, thus forming a steep, bowl-shaped depression called a caldera (Spanish for kettle or cauldron). These features are highly variable in size, ranging from 1-100 km in diameter. In most cases, they can be readily differentiated from summit craters, which are generally much smaller and form by explosive erosion of the central vent. Felsic calderas are surrounded by thick blankets of pumice derived from the eruption of voluminous pyroclastic sheet flows.
Variations in form and genesis allow calderas to be subdivided into three types:
Crater-Lake type calderas associated with the collapse of stratovolcanoes 
Basaltic calderas associated with the summit collapse of shield volcanoes 
Resurgent calderas which lack an association with a single centralized vent 
CRATER-LAKE TYPE CALDERAS
This caldera type is generated after the main phase of a Plinian eruption, during collapse of a stratovolcano into the void of the underlying, depleted magma chamber. Although the waning phase of a Plinian eruption is often associated with the generation of pyroclastic flows, piston-like collapse of the volcanic edifice can generate the additional eruption of voluminous, pumice-dominated sheet flows along ring fractures surrounding the collapsing mass. These sheetflows form thick deposits of ignimbrite, the hallmark of both Crater-Lake type and resurgent calderas.
Crater Lake, Oregon, is the namesake of this caldera type. With a water depth of 600 m, Crater Lake is the deepest fresh-water lake in North America. The caldera walls rise above the lake level an additional 600 m. This large depression formed from the violent eruption and collapse of the ancestral stratovolcano Mt. Mazama about 6850 years ago. The massive eruption generated ~50 times more tephra than the Mt. St. Helens eruption in 1980. About 30 km of pyroclastic material erupted during the main plinian phase, thus depleting the magma chamber and leaving its roof unsupported. As ignimbrites erupted toward the end of the plinian phase, the volcano edifice began to collapse along ring fractures. The collapse generating additional pyroclastic sheet flows and a 10-km-wide caldera (see Mazama ignimbrite). The caldera has since been the site of several small eruptions which have covered parts of the caldera floor with andesitic to rhyolitic lava. The most voluminous of these post-caldera eruptions have built the volcanic cone of Wizard Island on the western side of the lake. These eruptions ceased about 2000 years ago.
The two most recent eruptions associated with the generation of Crater-Lake type calderas are both from Indonesia -- the colossal eruption of Tambora in 1815, and the equally spectacular eruption of Krakatau in 1883.
BASALTIC SHIELD VOLCANO CALDERAS
The summit regions of many active shield volcanoes are marked by calderas. Hawiian examples include the Mokuaweoweo caldera on Mauna Loa and the Kilauea caldera on Kilauea. Others include the Erta Al caldera in Ethiopia, the summit caldera of Piton del la Fournaise on Reunion Island, and the spectacular basaltic calderas on the shield volcanoes of the Galapagos Islands. Most basaltic shield volcano calderas on earth are 1-5 km in diameter. Those observed on Mars, however, are extraordinarily large, the largest being the Olympus Mons caldera, with a diameter of more than 60 km!
Whereas Crater-Lake type calderas are associated with the explosive eruption felsic magma, generating voluminous pyroclastic sheet flows, basaltic calderas are not produced by such catastrophic events. Instead, they subside in increments to produce a nested structure of pits and terraces, as shown in the photos above for the Kilauea caldera and the Erta Al caldera. Basaltic calderas like these are gradually enlarged by episodic collapse, due to the extraction of lava from shallow-level magma chambers underlying the summit areas. In some cases, the extraction of magma may occur through fractures that feed eruptions along the flanks of the shield volcano. Local collapse along such fractures can generate a linear system of pit craters that emanate away from many basaltic calderas and summit craters. Photo by Vic Camp
RESURGENT CALDERAS
Resurgent calderas are the largest volcanic structures on earth. They are associated with massive eruptions of voluminous pyroclastic sheet flows, on a scale not yet observed in historic times. The youngest of these resurgent calderas is the 74,000-year-old Toba Caldera on the Indonesian Island of Sumatra. The Toba eruption generated 2800 times more pyroclastic material than the moderate Plinian eruption of Mt. St. Helens in 1980! There are three resurgent calderas in the United States less than 1.5 million years old -- the Valles Caldera in New Mexico, the Long Valley Caldera in California, and the Yellowstone Caldera in Wyoming.
With diameters ranging from 15 to 100 km, resurgent calderas dwarf those of Crater-Lake type. They are similar to Crater-Lake type calderas in that they are also generated by crustal collapse above shallow magma chambers. Resurgent calderas, however, are too large to have been associated with a Crater-Lake type central volcano, like Mt. Mazama. Apart from their large size, the definitive feature of resurgent calderas is a broad topographic depression with a central elevated mass resulting from post-collapse upheaval of the caldera floor. Uplift is commonly more than one kilometer. The caldera floor is typically filled with rhyolitic lavas, obsidian flows, and domes, and the uplifted centers often contain elongate rifts (graben) along their crests.
The evolution of a resurgent caldera is depicted in the illustration shown here (modified from Calvin J. Hamilton). Caldera formation begins with crustal uplift associated with the arrival of a large plume of gas-rich rhyolitic magma (A). Ring fractures propagate outward from the chamber toward the surface and these are used as conduits for escaping magma. Decompression of the magma results in massive vesiculation and the explosive eruption of tephra into the high atmosphere (B). As the eruption wanes, pyroclastic flows begin to erupt from the ring fractures. The magma chamber is depleted and its crustal roof begins to collapse, generating additional pyroclastic flows (C). As the eruption ends, hundreds of meters of pyroclastic flows have now accumulated within the caldera (inflow facies) and beyond the caldera walls (outflow facies) (D). The floor of the caldera may quickly be occupied by a lake (E). Resurgence of the caldera floor takes about 1000 to 100,000 years to accomplish (F). This period of uplift may be controlled by compression of the remaining magma beneath the collapsed roof of the chamber, or by the arrival of new magma into the chamber.
After resurgence, a thick pile of dacitic coulées erupted non-explosively along the northern caldera ring fracture about 2.1 million years ago. These probably represent the last vestiges of the magma that fed the eruption of pyroclastic flows. The non-explosive nature of these dacitic coulées is due to their low volatile content, which was lost during rapid vesiculation (degassing) of the magma by the caldera-forming eruption. 
LAVA DOMES.
Although felsic lavas are generally associated with explosive Plinian-type eruptions, they sometimes extrude at the surface as relatively cold, viscous lava domes. Vesiculation during eruption will deplete the magma in volatiles, thus depriving the magma of the very gases needed for a sustained eruption. As the eruption wanes, this degassed magma will rise up the central vent where it extrudes at the summit crater as a massive plug of viscous lava. The process is analagous to a slow-moving plug of toothpaste extruding from a toothpaste tube. In rare cases lava domes can erupt independently through fractures unassociated with a central-vent volcano. Several such domes are present in the Mono Lake-Inyo Craters volcanic chain in east-central California; this chain has erupted four lava domes in the past 700 years.
Three examples of lava domes, from Alaska, Japan, and Saudi Arabia are shown below. For a spectacular 3D simulated view of a lava dome, click Mt. St. Helens lava dome.
The morphology of lava domes is variable. They are typically thick, steep extrusions, but their shapes can vary from circular, low-profile domes (tortas) to cylindral spines with thick talus slopes (Peléean domes). Less sluggish types are gradational to lava flows and are sometimes referred to as dome flows or coulées. Lava domes have compositions ranging from basaltic andesite to rhyolite, although most are composed of crystal-rich dacite. Some lava domes erupt obsidian (volcanic glass), which forms when magma is cooled so quickly that individual minerals do not have time to crystallize from the melt.
Slowly rising lava domes may grow for months or for several years in the aftermath of explosive eruptions. The earth's longest historical dome-building event has generated the Santiaguito dome in Guatemala. This viscous lava dome began to erupt in 1922 and is still growing today! An empirical example of dome growth through time is shown in the illustration below for the Mt. St. Helens lava dome from 1980 to 1983.
The slow growth of mature lava domes is generally nonexplosive. However, younger domes composed of lava that is not entirely degassed, may occassionally explode. The periodic explosion or gravitational collapse of these viscous masses can sometimes generate deadly pyroclastic flows. These avalanches of hot lava fragments and toxic gases have killed thousands of people throughout history. For a more thorough explaination of dome-collapse pyroclastic flows, link to nuée ardentes.

*
PRODUCTS OF ERUPTIONS.
This section describes the volcanic features and phenomena generated by volcanic eruptions. The eruptive products are highly variaible and largely dependent on the composition, viscosity, and gas content of the erupting magma. Lava flows, for example, are more common in relatively non-explosive basaltic eruptions associated with sheild volcanoes, scoria cones, and fissures. On the other hand, pyroclastic flows, lahars and voluminous tephra deposits are more common in explosive andesitic-to-rhyolitic eruptions associated with stratovolcanoes. Gaseous emissions are also examined, as are their harmful effects on both local and global scales.
LAVA FLOW TYPES.
Volumetrically, most lava is of basaltic composition. Basaltic melts have overall lower gas contents and are more fluid than their andesitic-to-rhyolitic counterparts. Their higher fluidity (lower viscosity) is a product of their lower SiO2 (silica) contents. When gases exsolve from basaltic melts they are allowed to rise unimpeded through the fluid magma without a significant build up of gas pressure. This results in relatively calm, nonexplosive eruptions, and a preponderance of lava. In contrast, when gases exsolve from felsic magmas, their upward mobility is impeded by the high viscosity of the melt. This results in the buildup of gas pressure, which generates explosive eruptions associated with a preponderance of pyroclastic ejecta. The low viscosity of basaltic lavas allows them to be extruded over great distances, often producing high-volume lava flows with low aspect ratios (ratio of thickness to area). Under the right conditions, de-gassed felsic magmas can also erupt lava in a nonviolent manner. However, felsic lavas tend to be much thicker than basaltic lavas and have much higher aspect ratios.
The volume of magma generated over a given amount of time is known as the effusion rate. The effusion rates for historical eruptions of basaltic lava are highly variable, from 0.5 to 5000 m3/sec. Historic flows from Mt. Etna average about 0.5 m3/sec, whereas the fissure-generated flows associated with the Icelandic Laki eruption in 1783 were released at a rate of ~5000 m3/sec. The effusion rates for andesite and dacite are much lower (~10 to 0.05 m3/sec) due to their higher viscosities.
BASALTIC LAVA.
Basaltic lava flows erupt primarily from shield volcanoes, fissure systems, and scoria cones. These fluid lava flows can be subdivided into two end-member structural types, based primarily on the nature of lava flow surfaces:
Pahoehoe Lava -- Surfaces are smooth, billowy, or ropy. 
A'a lava -- Surfaces are fragmented, rough, and spiny, with a "cindery" appearance 
PAHOEHOE LAVA.
In addition to the smooth and ropy surfaces shown above, solidified pahoehoe flows can also display shelly to slabby surfaces. Shelly pahoehoe contains a billowy flow top with a frothy vesicular surface skin, only a few centimeters thick, overlying large cavities, generally 5-30 centimeters thick. These shelly surfaces often collapse when walking on the top of the flow. Slabby pahoehoe contains a series of closely spaced slabs, a few meters across and a few centimeters thick, broken and tilted by mass movement, or drainage, of the underlying lava. Slabby pahoehoe is often gradational to a'a lava.
Pahoehoe lavas are typically the first to erupt from a vent. They are relatively thin (1-2 m) and very fluid with low viscosities. They advance downslope in a sort of smooth "rolling motion." The front of the flow usually advances as a thin (< 20 cm) glowing lobe that will chill and crust over after 1-2 meters of flow. It will slow and be overrun by a new lobe that propagates downslope until it also chills, and in turn is overrun by another flow. Overridding lavas and breakouts on the flow top and sides thus produce compound flows composed of several lobes cooling against one another. Slower moving pahoehoe flows will advance through the protrusion of small bulbous appendages at the flow front, called pahoehoe toes. The image to the left shows a breakout and the advancement of pahoehoe toes along the sides of a ropy pahoehoe lava flow.
High effusion rates may result in the development of inflated pahoehoe sheetflows. These large-volume pahoehoe flows are emplaced initially as thin sheets, 20-30 cm thick. Cooling of these flow sheets will produce a smooth pahoehoe crust which initially behaves in a plastic fashion. However, after attaining a thickness of 2-5 cm, the crust behaves more rigidly and develops strength. As the underlying liquid core of the flow increases in size due to sustained lava injection, the hydrostatic head of the flow is distributed evenly throughout. This can result in flow inflation and uniform uplift of the entire flow sheet. Such flows will inflate and thicken by as much as 4 meters. Many of these inflated flows will crystallize in place; however, some will deflate after emplacement as the fluid core drains beneath the solidified crust. Deflation is evident in many Hawaiian flows which contain tree molds that currently stand 1-2 meters above the current surface of the pahoehoe sheet flows. An example of deflation on Kilauea Volcano, Hawaii, is demonstrated to the left by solidified lava around high-standing tree trunks to produce hollow tree molds standing above the deflated pahoehoe surface.
A'A LAVA.
The a'a flow shown here is advancing slowly over an older pahoehoe surface. A'a lava flows are generally more viscous and thicker than pahoehoe flows. Their flow fronts can vary from two meters to as much as twenty meters thick. Their slow advance is similar to the movement of a tractor tread. A jumbled mass of debris steepens at the flow front until a section breaks off and tumbles forward. Inward from the flow front, the flow usually contains an upper rubbly flow top, and a lower massive part of viscous lava insulated from the overlying rubble. The jagged cinder blocks that break off the front are then overridden by the massive lava core of the flow which pushes forward.
CONVERSION OF PAHOEHOE TO A'A.
Pahoehoe is often converted to a'a as lava advances downslope, away from the volcano. Conversion of a'a to pahoehoe, on the other hand, never takes place. The pahoehoe-to-a'a conversion can be caused by either an increase in flow viscosity, or an increase in the rate of shear. Cooling, gas loss, and crystallization of the lava will cause it to become increasingly more polymerized and viscous as it advances farther downslope. Although the downslope increase in viscosity can convert pahoehoe to a'a, a higher rate of shear can also cause the conversion. Shear increases in flows that have higher effusion rates. A'a begins to form when effusion rates are >5-10 cubic meters per second. The rate of shear can also increase as lava advances down increasingly steeper slopes. This is demonstrated, for example, by the conversion of pahoehoe to a'a in recent lava flows that have advanced down the Hilina Pali escarpment during the ongoing eruption of the Pu'u O'o Volcano, Hawaii.
ANDESITIC LAVA.
Whereas basalt forms a'a and pahoehoe lava, andesite generally produces blocky lava, which contains smooth-sided, angular fragments (blocks) that are not as splintery or vesicular as a'a lava fragments. The blocky nature of these flows is attributed to the higher viscosity of andesite. These viscous lavas have relatively high aspect ratios (thickness/area), generally > 1/100, and some are thick enough to form as lava domes. Andesite commonly erupts from stratovolcanoes, where they form small-volume flows that typically advance only short distances down the flanks of a volcano. The two examples shown here are short andesite flows advancing down the slope of the Lascar volcano in Chile, and the Colima volcano in Mexico.
Although detached blocks occur on the tops of andesite flows, the flow interior is composed of massive lava which grades downward into an autobrecciated (self-fragmented) basal layer. The flow moves by the injection of lobes of lava into the collar of blocky rubble that comprises the flow front. The flow-front rubble is then continually overridden by the massive lava core to form the fragmented basal layer of the flow.
DACITIC TO RHYOLITIC LAVA.
With increasing silica (SiO2) content and polymerization, the viscosities of these felsic lavas will increase accordingly. Although dacitic-to-rhyolitic lavas typically erupt from stratovolcanoes, they are not as abundant as andesite lava. Instead, felsic eruptions from stratovolcanoes are more commonly explosive and associated with the generation of tephra and pyroclastic flows. These explosive eruptions are a function of the high viscosities and high gas contents of dacitic and rhyolitic magmas. Such eruptions, however, will often deplete the magma source in dissolved gases. De-gassed magma can then rise to the surface and extrude in a less violent fashion, as dacite to rhyolite lava. These lavas are volumetrically smaller than their pyroclastic counterparts, and typically form after major eruptive events. Viscous dacitic-to-rhyolitic lavas generally ooze out of the volcano's central vent to form symmetrical lava domes. In some cases, however, asymmetric flow down one side of the vent can produce an elongated extrusion, called a coulée or a dome flow. These viscous flows vary from 50 to 500 meters in thickness, and are typically only a few kilometers long. However, some coulées may flow for several kilometers, probably due to high eruption temperatures, which would lower their viscosities.
In some cases, thick rhyolitic lavas will cool as glassy obsidian flows, as demonstrated by the appropriately named "Obsidian Flow" at the Long Valley caldera, shown in the photo below.
LARGE-VOLUME RHYOLITE LAVA FLOWS?
As demonstrated above, felsic magmas will either (1) erupt explosively to produce extensive deposits of tephra, or (2) nonexplosively to produce degassed, viscous lava (domes, coulees, or obsidian flows) which advance only short distances from their vents. There has been a significant amount of controversy, therefore, over rare rhyolite lavas that appear to occur as large-volume flows (10-100 cubic kilometers).
Most such flows occur near continental hotspots. The best known examples are those associated with (1) the Yellowstone hotspot track near the Idaho-Oregon border, and (2) the Ethiopian hotspot in northeastern Africa. These large-volume felsic volcanic rocks have outcrop, hand specimen, and thin section characteristics typical of lava flows. However, many volcanologists suspect that they are not lava flows at all, but rather rheomorphic ignimbrites. These are densely welded pyroclastic flows of pumice and ash, which were thick and hot enough to flow downslope and obliterate primary pyroclastic structures. They suggest that the original pumice and ash fragments have been streaked out like toffee strands so that the pyroclastic nature of the flow becomes unrecognizable.
Still, other workers are convinced that these voluminous rhyolites are in fact lava flows, and that their extensive distribution can be attributed to their unique position above a continental hotspot. They suggest that the widespread melting of continental crust above the hotspot could generate superheated, low-viscosity melts that would erupt in a fluid fashion to produce voluminous sheets of rhyolitic lava. The controversy is still unresolved.

LAVA FLOW FEATURES
JOINTING CHARACTERISTICS.
As a lava flow cools and crystallizes into a coherent rock, it begins to contract. Shrinkage of the rock mass results in the development of numerous cracks, called joints. Although lava flows can display a variety of jointing patterns, many of the thicker simple flows exhibit a three-tiered character: from bottom to top, a lower colonade, a middle entablature, and an upper colonade. The lower colonade is composed of columnar joints, which develop perpendicular to the cooling surface, at the base of the flow, where they intersect to form a series of columns. The columns may vary in length from one to five meters, with diameters that are generally less than one meter. Each column is polygonal in cross-section (typically hexagonal) and bounded by 4-to-8 joints. If present, the entablature is composed of an array of closely spaced, subvertical joints, which forms a more convoluted pattern of cracks known as hackly jointing. The upper colonade is generally poorly develped or non-existent. If present, the crude columnar joints are vesicular and much shorter than those displayed in the lower colonade.
LAVA CHANNELS.
Although highly effusive eruptions may advance downslope as massive sheets of basaltic lava, such flows are rare in the historic record. Fluid basalt will more commonly move down slope by creating its own channelways above gently sloping terrains, or by flowing down in pre-existing stream channels. A well-developed lava channel is shown here near a series of eruptive vents on the northeast rift zone of the Mauna Loa Volcano, Hawaii. Lava channels can develop in both pahoehoe and a'a basalt. Once established, lava channels will often develop lava levees along their lengths. In pahoehoe flows, natural levees will be constructed as the channel periodically overflows, thus allowing the lava to congeal and cool along the banks of the channel. In a'a flows, levee buildup can also occur by the bulldozing effect of the moving lava, which will push a'a blocks onto the lava banks. Although lava channels may initially be restricted to a topographic valley, as levees build up over time, they may eventually rise above the surrounding ground surface. Sometimes several small lava channels will flow around subdued hills or high ground to produce a kipuka, an Hawaiian term for "island." In Hawaii, these features are generally noted by their mature vegetation, which stands in contrast to the stark lack of vegetation in the younger, surrounding basalt flows.
One characteristic of a'a channels is the occurrence of nearly spherical masses of lava with diameters of a few inches to over ten feet. These features are called accretionary lava balls. When broken apart, they reveal a spiral structure which appears to form when a small fragment of solidified lava rolls along the surface of an a'a flow. The lava then adheres to the rolling mass, much like snow sticks to a rolling snowball.
LAVA CASCADES.
As lava descends down an irregular topographic surface it will occasionally flow over an abrupt escarpment to produce lava cascades, or lava falls, such as those shown here. 
As the effusive rate decreases, and the lava begins to cool, the basalt may solidify in place to cover the escarpment in an apron of crystalline rock, called a lava drapery.
TUMULI.
On flat or gentle slopes, the surfaces of pahoehoe flows are sometimes marked by elliptical domed structures, from 2 to 10 meters high, called tumuli. These are best developed on the surface of flows that are ponded in depressions, like craters or calderas. A tumulus develops when slow-moving lava beneath a solidified crust wells upward. The brittle crust usually buckles to accommodate the inflating core of the flow, thus creating a central crack along the length of the tumulus. These structures sometimes grade into elongate forms called pressure ridges, which commonly develop subparallel to the flow direction at flow margins, but perpendicular to the flow direction in the central portions of the flow. Localized upheaval of the underlying lava to produce tumuli can result from a variety of mechanisms, including (a) obstruction of lateral flow downstream behind a slow-moving lava front, (b) diversion of flow upward against an irregular topographic surface, (c) local upheaval from the volatilization of groundwater, and (d) deflation of an inflated pahoehoe sheet flow leading to differential sagging and crustal buckling.
ROOTLESS ERUPTIONS: SQUEEZE-UPS AND HORNITOS.
Rootless eruptions are not connected at depth to a magma chamber, but rather result from surface eruptions on pahoehoe surfaces. When the pahoehoe crust thickens and the underlying lava becomes cool, viscous, and gas-depleted, pasty lava can squeeze up through the axial fracture of the tumulus like cold toothpaste. This process creates a protrusion of cheesy basalt commonly called a squeeze-up. Squeeze-ups can occur as bulbous mounds on pahoehoe surfaces, or as linear wedges in the axial core of tumuli. It the lava remains hot and liquid, local extrusions through the cracked pahoehoe surfaces can produce rootless cones of spatter, called hornitos, or driblet cones. Such features can erupt through the axial cracks of tumuli as well as through cracks and openings overlying active lava tubes.
LAVA TUBES.
The chilling and crystallization of basaltic lava around the sides, bottom, and top of lava channels produces a rock-encased conduit called a lava tube. The surrounding crystalline basalt remains relatively hot and insulates the interior lava in the lava tube from further crystallization. Although lava tubes are generally restricted to pahoehoe lava flows, they can form in some thick a'a flows, like those that occur on Mt. Etna. The tube morphology provides a very efficient mechanism for basaltic lava flows to travel great distances away from their source without significant heat loss. Their lateral extents are highly variable. Although lava tubes are typically < 1 km long, they may exceed several kilometers, as demonstrated, for example, by a lava tube in Queensland, Australia that is > 100 km long. The diameters of lava tubes are also highly variable, from < 1m to as much as 15m.
High lava temperatures of about 1150 degrees Centigrade (~ 2100 degrees Fahrenheit) are maintained throughout the tube system. These high temperatures allow the lava to remain very fluid. The high fluidity of lava in lava tubes and lava channels leads to high transport rates. During the 1984 eruption of Mauna Loa, for example, channel flow was measured by USGS volcanologists at 35 mph. Lava speeds within the current tube system associated with the Pu'u O'o eruption have been measured up to 23 mph. This fast moving, turbulent lava, combined with the high lava temperatures, can result in thermal erosion of the tube interior. Once established, well-insulated lava tubes can thus erode both downward and laterally over time. The turbulence from fluid motion and from constantly escaping gases generates spatter fragments that coat the walls of many lava tubes. Eventually, the eruption will cease and the remaining lava in the tube will drain downslope to expose a hollow, inactive lava tube. Such tubes typically contain a flat floor and exhibit high-lava marks on the conduit walls. A thin coating of agglutinated spatter is often found on the tube walls, together with icicle-shaped lava stalactites hanging from the roof. Mound-like lava stalagmites derived from spatter dripping onto the floor of tubes are less common. The example shown here is the well-known Thurston lava tube near the Kilauea summit caldera in Hawaii Volcanoes National Park (Photo courtesy of the USGS).
Because lava tubes remain buried, they often go unrecognized on the surface. However, many lava tubes are delineated on the surface by a linear or curvilinear series of collapse depressions, called skylights along the axis of the tube. On active lava tubes, skylights provide a unique view of actively flowing incandescent lava in the lava tube system. The example shown here from a skylight developed above an active lava tube associated with the Kupaianaha eruption in 1989 on the east rift system of the larger Kilauea volcano, Hawaii. 
LAVA AND WATER.
The injection of basaltic lava into surface water can be quiescent or highly explosive. Pahoehoe tends to pour into water in a passive manner, sometimes with little interaction beyond the boiling of water. More explosive interactions are generally associated with a'a flows. Water has a greater opportunity to penetrate into the cracks of a'a, where it expands explosively and fragments the lava into airborne particles. Littoral cones can develop at the water's edge from the accumulation of these airborne fragments.
PILLOW BASALTS.
When basalt enters water passively, it forms pillow basalt. These are bulbous bodies with quenched, glassy rinds. They are often spherical, with diameters of 30-100 cm, although many are lobate. During formation, the outer surface of each lobe chills instantaneously. However, the constant injection of lava may cause a single lobe to swell, thus cracking the glassy rind, allowing a new lobe bud forth. Individual pillows can break off the budding lobe and cool as a single mass. As the interior of a pillow cools, it forms crude cooling joints that radiate inward, perpendicular to the cooling surface. Each pillow will settle into gaps between the pillows below it. In continental lakes, pillow accumulations can be several tens of meters thick, whereas those that develop on the ocean floors can be hundreds of meters thick.
HYALOCLASTITE.
Quenching and fragmentation of basaltic lavas produces an accumulation of angular, glassy fragments called hyaloclastite. Basalt fragmentation can occur by the explosive eruption process, or by an essentially nonexplosive process associated with the spalling of pillow basalt rinds by thermal shock or chill shattering. The hyaloclastite fragments are equant, angular shards of black glass, generally between .25 and 2.0 cm in diameter . This water-quenched basalt glass is called sideromelane, a pure variety of glass that that is transparent, and lacks the very small iron-oxide crystals found in the more common opaque variety of basalt glass. In hyaloclastite, these glassy fragments are typically surrounded by a matrix of yellow-to-brown palagonite, a wax-like substance that forms from the hydration and alteration of the sideromelane. A related hydrovolcanic deposit, called palagonite tuff, contains a mixture of sideromelane shards and coarser-grained fragments of basaltic rock in a palagonite matrix.
TEPHRA AND PYROCLASTIC ROCKS.
The rapid eruption of expanding gases results in the obliteration and fragmentation of magma and rock. The greater the explosivity, the greater the amount of fragmentation. Individual eruptive fragments are called pyroclasts ("fire fragments"). Tephra (Greek, for ash) is a generic term for any airborne pyroclastic accumulation. Whereas tephra is unconsolidated, a pyroclastic rock is produced from the consolidation of pyroclastic accumulations into a coherent rock type.
CLASSIFICATION OF PYROCLASTS - Tephra is classified on the basis of pyroclast size:
ASH -- Very fine-grained fragments (< 2 mm), generally dominated by broken glass shards, but with variable amounts of broken crystal and lithic (rock) fragments. 
LAPILLI -- Pea- to walnut-size pyroclasts (2 to 64 mm). They often look like cinders. In water-rich eruptions, the accretion of wet ash may form rounded spheres known as accretionary lapilli (left). 
BLOCKS AND BOMBS -- Fragments >64 mm. Bombs are ejected as incandescent lava fragments which were semi-molten when airborne, thus inheriting streamlined, aerodynamic shapes. Blocks (not shown) are ejected as solid fragments with angular shapes.
Within this size classification, specific types of tephra can be further defined by physical attributes. For example, lapilli-size fragments of basaltic lava may cool quickly while airborne, to form glassy teardrop-shaped lapilli called Pele's tears. During strong winds, these molten fragments can be drawn out into fine filaments called Pele's hair. Nonexplosive Hawaiian-type eruptions often produce lapilli- to bomb-size fragments, called spatter which remain airborne for only a short amount of time so that are still liquid when they hit the ground surface. Some lapilli- to bomb-size pyroclasts maintain a frothy appearance due to escaping volcanic gases and the rapid accumulation of bubbles (vesicles). These highly vesicular rock types include mafic and felsic varieties. Vigorous gas escape in felsic lavas produces pumice, whereas similar gas escape in mafic lavas produces reticulite. The high vesicularity of pumice lowers the density of this rock type so that it can literally float on water. Reticulite has a still lower density, with vesicles occupying up to 98% of the total volume. Unlike pumice, however, most of the bubble walls in reticulite are broken so that it sinks in the presence of water. Reticulite, however, is not as common as scoria, a denser mafic rock containing a smaller abundance of relatively large vesicles. Click the links below to view images of these pyroclast types.
NON-GENETIC CLASSIFICATION OF PYROCLASTIC ROCKS.
In some cases, unconsolidated pyroclasts can be welded, compacted, or cemented into a coherent pyroclastic rock. The nongenetic classification of pyroclastic rocks is partly based on the relative abundance of the incorporated pyroclast types discussed above. For example:
Ash tuff - rock dominated by ash; sometimes simply referred to as tuff. 
Lapilli tuff - rock dominated by lapilli. 
Tuff breccia - rock containing 25% to 75% blocks and/or bombs. 
Pyroclastic breccia - rock containing at least 75% blocks and bombs. 
Agglomerate - rock containing at least 75% bombs. 
Agglutinate - rock composed of fused, largely unrecognizable, basalt spatter fragments. 
GENETIC CLASSIFICATION OF TEPHRA DEPOSITS.
Pyroclastic airfall deposits (tephra) contain pyroclasts that are coarser near the vent (bomb and lapilli size) and become increasingly finer grained away from the vent (lapilli to ash size). The mafic to felsic composition of these deposits will vary with eruption type. Two end-member genetic types of airfall deposits are recognized:
Scoria-fall deposits -- These are derived from Strombolian eruptions of scoria cones. The deposit is composed of basaltic to andesitic vesiculated pyroclasts (scoria) lying near the eruptive vent. 
Pumice-fall deposits -- These are derived from Plinian eruptions of stratovolcanoes. The deposit is composed of highly vesiculated dacitic to rhyolitic pyroclasts (pumice) which can be destributed for hundreds of square kilometers away from the vent. 
In addition to these two end-member types, some airfall deposits can be very highly fragmented to generate ash-fall deposits. Such fine-grained deposits are derived from highly explosive Vulcanian eruptions and hydrovolcanic eruptions
PYROCLASTIC FLOWS.
GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS.
A pyroclastic flow is a fluidized mixture of solid to semi-solid fragments and hot, expanding gases that flows down the flank of a volcanic edifice. These awesome features are heavier-than-air emulsions that move much like a snow avalanche, except that they are fiercely hot, contain toxic gases, and move at phenomenal, hurricane-force speeds, often over 100 km/hour. They are the most deadly of all volcanic phenomena.
FLOW FLUIDIZATION.
The extraordinary velocity of a pyroclastic flow is partly attributed to its fluidization. A moving pyroclastic flow has properties more like those of a liquid than a mass of solid fragments. Its fluid behavior can only be described as spectacular, as evidenced by the 6000-year-old Koya flow in southern Japan, which traveled more than 60 km from its source, ten of which were over open water! The Koya flow left a deposit that was only two meters thick over its 60 km extent. Such mobility comes from the disappearance of inter-particle friction. A fluidized flow is best described as a dispersion of large fragments in a medium of fluidized fine fragments. A constant stream of hot, expanding gases keeps the smallest of the fragments (ash and lapilli size particles) in constant suspension. This solid-gas mixture can then support larger fragments that float in the matrix. The expanding gas component is derived from a combination of (1) the constant exsolution of volcanic gas emitted by the hot pyroclasts, and (2) from the ingestion, heating, and rapid expansion air during movement of the flow.
TERMINOLOGY.
The terminology of pyroclastic flows and pyroclastic flow deposits can be complex and confusing. In general, there are two end-member types of flows:
NUÉE ARDENTES -- these contain dense lava fragments derived from the collapse of a growing lava dome or dome flow, and 
PUMICE FLOWS -- these contain vesiculated, low-density pumice derived from the collapse of an eruption column.
A nuée ardente deposit is called a block-and-ash deposit (see below), whereas a pumice flow deposit is called an ignimbrite. Each end-member type of pyroclastic flow is discussed below, followed by a description of ignimbrites.
NUÉE ARDENTES.
The French geologist Alfred Lacroix attached the name nuée ardente (glowing cloud) to the pyroclastic flow from Mt. Pelée that destroyed the city of St. Pierre in 1902. The flow was generated from the explosive collapse of a growing lava dome at the summit of the volcano, which then swept down on the city. Thus, nuée ardente eruptions are often called Peléen eruptions. However, this term cannot be as narrowly defined as the other eruption types, because nuée ardentes are often linked with both Plinian and Vulcanian activity.
Although the term nuée ardente is now applied to all pyroclastic flows generated by dome collapse, it is somewhat of a misnomer to describe these features as a "glowing cloud." A more precise term would be glowing avalanche. The bulk of these hot block-and-ash flows hug the ground surface, but are disguised by an overlying cloud of fine ash particles that are winnowed out of the flow by a processes called elutriation. Nuée ardentes, therefore, are composed of two related parts: a pyroclastic avalanche largely hidden from view by an overlying ash cloud.
Mt. Unzen nuée ardentes -- The diagram here demonstrates the sequence of events associated with the 1991-95 nuée ardente eruptions from Mt. Unzen, Japan. Collapse of a growing lava dome generates the nuée ardente. Within seconds a faster-moving cloud of smaller ash-sized fragments (the ash-cloud surge) forms above and in front of the nuée ardente. In some cases, dome collapse is attributed to explosive eruption at the summit crater. Explosive collapse may clear the throat of the volcano, thus generating vertical eruption columns.
Over a four-year period, hundreds of nuée ardentes erupted from Mt. Unzen's summit area. Many of these swept down the populated Mizunashi River valley displacing thousands of people and destroying several hundred homes and precious farmland.
Nuée ardente deposits are composed of dense, non-vesiculated, blocky fragments derived from the collapsed lava dome. They therefore differ significantly from the highly vesiculated ignimbrites which are derived from eruption column collapse. Nuée ardente deposits contain blocks in a fine-grained matrix of ash. The deposits, therefore, are called block-and-ash deposits. They are denser than ignimbrites, and typically are less extensive.
PUMICE FLOWS.
Pumice flows are pumice-rich pyroclastic flows derived from the collapse of an eruption column. The lowermost part of the eruption column is called the gas thrust region. Here, the density of the eruption column is greater than the density of the surrounding air. The column continues to rise, however, because of the thrust provided by the release and rapid expansion of volcanic gas. Occasionally, the gas thrust region may become so chock-full of debris that its high density cannot be supported by the thrust of expanding gases. The column thus collapses downward under gravity as a mass of vesiculating pumice that advances rapidly down the flanks of the volcano.
Although both nuée ardentes and pumice flows are fluidized, pumice flows are more energetic and mobile. This is partly attributed to their lower densities, but also to their greater store of kinetic energy generated by vertical drops up to several kilometers above the volcano's summit. The further it falls, the greater its kinetic energy, and the further and faster it will travel horizontally.
Pumice flows have a tripartite division. The main body hugs the ground surface and is dominated by pumice fragments in an ash matrix. Like nuée ardentes, this pyroclastic avalanche is overlain by an ash cloud of elutriated fine ash. An additional component of a pumice flow is the ground surge. These are forward-springing jets of incandescent ash that occur in the advancing head of the flow. They advance with a rolling and rapidly puffing movement which is thought to be caused by the ingestion of air in the front of the flow. Air ingestion produces strong fluidation in flow front, and explosive heating of the air causes some of the material to be hurled forward as a low-density, turbulent surge.
A single Plinian-type eruption may generate hundreds of pumice flows which typically flow down valleys radiating outward from the summit of the volcano. Individual flows may vary in length from a few kilometers to tens of kilometers. These are miniscule, however, in comparison to the massive pumice flows generated by caldera collapse. Caldera-generated flows are not restricted to valleys, but rather fill in valleys and adjacent low ridges to produce pumice-dominated pyroclastic sheet flows that can obliterate an area the size of Ohio in a few minutes. These huge eruptions can eject a thousand cubic kilometers of material from ring fractures in just a few hours. The last such eruption on earth took place at Toba, Indonesia, about 74,000 years ago to deposit an ignimbrite with a volume of over 2000 cubic kilometers. Similar eruptions in the United States occurred less than two million years ago at the Long Valley, Valles and Yellowstone calderas.
LAHARS.
GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS.
Lahar is an Indonesian term for a volcanic mudflow. These lethal mixtures of water and tephra have the consistency of wet concrete, yet they can flow down the slopes of volcanoes or down river valleys at rapid speeds, similar to fast-moving streams of water. These mud slurries carry debris ranging in size from ash to lapilli, to boulders more than 10 meters in diameter. Lahars can vary from hot to cold, depending on their mode of genesis. The maximum temperature of a lahar is 100 degrees Centigrade, the boiling temperature of water.
LAHAR GENERATION.
Lahars are generated by a variety of mechanisms. The majority are produced by intense rainfall during or after an eruption. A tragic example of such an event was the 1991 eruption of Mt. Pinatubo in the Philippines, which was contemporaneous with the arrival of a major hurricane. An estimated 700 people died from buiral by the ensuing lahars, together with the collapse of structures benearth the wet ash. As demonstrated by the graph below, lahars can also be generated directly from a volcanic eruption as massive amounts of water are generated either by the rapid melting of ice and snow, or by the disruption of crater lakes.
Pyroclastic flows are particularly efficient at generating lahars because they have the capability to melt large quantities of snow and ice in a just few hours. A tragic example of this mechanism occurred in 1985 when pyroclastic flows erupted at the snow-covered summit of the Nevado del Ruiz volcano in Columbia. In only a few hours, the eruption generated a lahar that killed ~23,000 people in the village of Armero and adjacent towns located several tens of kilometers downslope from the summit. Lahars can also be generated by the basal melting of glaciers by lava flows. Basal melting of glacial ice in Iceland has produced largest historic lahars, in terms of discharge. These water-rich, glacial outburst floods are called jokulhlaups.
MT. RAINIER: The Future Site of a Catastrophic Lahar.
The snow-covered peaks of the Cascade volcanoes in Washington, Oregon, and northern California pose a clear threat to surrounding towns and villages. Past events suggest that a catastrophic lahar could lie in the future of Mt. Rainier, the largest of the Cascade volcanoes.
The 4000 m high summit of Mt. Rainier contains the largest system of alpine glaciers in the Cascade Range. The periodic melting of glacier ice from Mt. Rainier has generated at least 50 major lahars over the past 10,000 years. The largest of these mudflow deposits, one of the world's largest, is the ~5700-year-old Osceola lahar, shown in the adjacent map (courtesy of USGS). The Osceola lahar travelled down the White River, over 112 km from its source. It then spread out at its mouth to cover an area of over 300 square kilometers along the shoreline of Puget Sound. The recent geologic history of Mt. Rainier demonstrates that a major mudflow descends down the White River once every 600 years. The younger 500-year-old Electron lahar (see map) was also generated from Mt. Rainier. It flowed 56 kilometers down the Puyallup River to within 15 kilometers of Tacoma, Washington. More than 300,000 people now live in the area covered by these extensive lahars! Unlike floods, such catastropic mudflows can occur with little or no warning. Some volcanologists have predicted that Mt. Rainier will be the site of the next Cascade eruption. Therefore, the volcano is monitored closely, with the hope that we can warn the local population before the next lahar strikes. 
VOLCANIC GASES.
GAS COMPOSITION.
Other than free oxygen, generated by photosynthesis, all atmospheric gases were derived from inside the earth and released by volcanic eruptions. The gaseous portion of magma varies from ~1 to 5% of the total weight. Water vapor constitutes 70-90%. The remaining gases include CO2, SO2 (tear gas), and trace amounts of of N, H, CO, S, Ar, Cl, and F. These subordinate gases can combine with hydrogen and water to produce numerous toxic compounds, such as HCl, HF, H2SO4, H2S, which are typical products of fumarolic activity.
A variety of sulfur aerosols may be present and sulfur itself may condenses around the fumarole into a crystalline accumulation called sulfaterra (yellow ground). On some volcanoes, enough sulfur is present to be mined as an economic resource. H2S is sometimes called "sewer gas" because it has a rotten egg odor. It is an insidious poison that irrates the eyes, nose, and throat. SO2 on the other hand, is the biting, chocking gas that you smell right after you've lit a kitchen match. When these two gases occur together, they react quickly with each other (within minutes) to produce sulfaterra and water vapor.
MONITORING GASES
Monitoring volcanic gases can be helpful in predicting eruptions. For example, an increase in CO2 and SO2 concentrations emitted from fumaroles may indicate increasing magmatic activity beneath the volcano. The composition and relative volumes of these volatiles can be measured in a variety of ways:
DIRECT MEASUREMENTS -- Gases escaping from fumaroles can be collected in evacuated flasks and analyzed in geochemical laboratories. Although much useful data has been assembled in this way, the technique can be dangerous and there is great difficulty in collecting samples that are uncontaminated by atmospheric air.
COSPEC MEASUREMENTS -- Another technique involves the remote sensing of some gases by a correlation spectrometer, a devise orignally developed in the 1970s to monitor SO2 and other gases from factory smokestacks. In volcanically active areas, the mounting of COSPECS on helicopters allows SO2 concentrations to be cataloged and monitored on a daily, or weekly, basis. The most recent COSPECs are infrared spectrometers which measure the amount of infrared light absorbed by CO2 and other gases. 
TOMS MEASUREMENTS -- On a more regional scale, the distribution and amount of sulfur dioxide released into the stratosphere by volcanic eruptions can be measured by the total ozone mapping spectrometer (TOMS), which is a sensor originally sent aloft in 1979 aboard the Nimbus-7 and Meteor-3 satellites. Improved TOMS instruments sent into lower orbits in 1997 have dramatically improved our detection capabilities. 
SURFACE HAZARDS OF GAS EMISSION
The destructive effects of volcanism are usually attributed to voluminous outpourings of lava, or to catastrophic pyroclastic eruptions. However, volcanic gases are also dangerous because they are hot and toxic, and their emission in large quantities can easily kill unaware people. For example, lava tubes on active and dormant volcanoes may be dangerous to walk in because they can trap poisonous gases. In rare cases, thousands of people have died in volcanic gas eruptions. To read about a catastrophic example of gas expulsion, see Lake Nyos. Two areas of current volcanic hazard associated with gas emission are described here:
KILAUEA VOLCANO, HAWAII ("VOG" AND "LAZE")
The Pu'u O'o eruption on the Kilauea volcano began in 1983. COSPEC measurments before the eruption showed that the volcano was releasing about 150 tons of SO2 per day, nearly all from the summit caldera. However, during the high fire-fountaining eruptions at Pu'u O'o the amount of SO2 released was as high as 30,000 tons per day (these episodes occurred every 3-4 weeks between 1983 and 1986 and lasted 24 hours or less). The current average emission is about 1,800 tons per day.
Chemical reactions are responsible for two types of toxic gas mixtures that are a particular problem for residents and tourists on the the Big Island of Hawaii. These toxic clouds are called VOG and LAZE.
VOG: Sulfur dioxide released at the summit, the east rift, and along skylights in the tube system reacts chemically with oxygen, dust particles, sunlight and water in the air to form a mixture of sulfate aerosols (tiny particles and droplets), sulfuric acid, and other oxidized sulfate species that is known as "vog". The pollution clouds of vog are normally carried by the northeasterly trade winds to the southwest, where the winds wrap around the island, sending the vog up the western Kona coast, which is the major tourist location on the island. When the trade winds are moderate, the vog stays on the east side of the island. The vog is toxic and hazardous to humans.
LAZE: When lava enters the ocean, another type of chemical reaction takes place between molten lava and sea water. White-plume clouds are generated by intense heat and vigorous chemical reactions. These misty clouds, called "laze" contain a mixture of hydrochloric acid and seawater vapor. Laze clouds can drop rainwater on people along the coast. It is often more acidic than lemon juice, with a pH of 1.5 to 2.5, but it is more corrosive than lemon juice to the skin and clothing. The HCL is toxic and causes irritation to the throat, lungs, eyes, and nose.

CLIMATE EFFECTS OF VOLCANIC ERUPTIONS.
THE OZONE, GREENHOUSE, AND HAZE EFFECTS
There is considerable debate on the role that humans play in changing global climate through both the burning of fossil fuels and the release of chlorofluorocarbon (CFC) gases. Some argue that human interaction poses less of a threat to our atmosphere than do natural processes, like volcanic eruptions. This places a great deal of importance on understanding the role of volcanic eruptions in affecting global climate change. Whatever the source, it is apparent that compositional changes in the earth's atmosphere generate three principal climatic effects: the ozone effect, the greenhouse effect and the haze effect.
EXAMPLES OF GLOBAL COOLING IN THE AFTERMATH OF HISTORIC ERUPTIONS:
Observational evidence shows a clear correlation between historic eruptions and subsequent years of cold climate conditions. Four well-known historic examples are described below.
LAKI (1783) -- The eastern U.S. recorded the lowest-ever winter average temperature in 1783-84, about 4.8OC below the 225-year average. Europe also experienced an abnormally severe winter. Benjamin Franklin suggested that these cold conditions resulted from the blocking out of sunlight by dust and gases created by the Iceland Laki eruption in 1783. The Laki eruption was the largest outpouring of basalt lava in historic times. Franklin's hypothesis is consistent with modern scientific theory, which suggests that large volumes of SO2 are the main culprit in haze-effect global cooling.
TAMBORA (1815) -- Thirty years later, in 1815, the eruption of Mt. Tambora, Indonesia, resulted in an extremely cold spring and summer in 1816, which became known as the year without a summer. The Tambora eruption is believed to be the largest of the last ten thousand years. New England and Europe were hit exceptionally hard. Snowfalls and frost occurred in June, July and August and all but the hardiest grains were destroyed. Destruction of the corn crop forced farmers to slaughter their animals. Soup kitchens were opened to feed the hungry. Sea ice migrated across Atlanitic shipping lanes, and alpine glaciers advanced down mountain slopes to exceptionally low elevations.
KRAKATAU (1883) -- Eruption of the Indonesian volcano Krakatau in August 1883 generated twenty times the volume of tephra released by the 1980 eruption of Mt. St. Helens. Krakatau was the second largest eruption in history, dwarfed only by the eruption of neighboring Tambora in 1815 (see above). For months after the Krakatau eruption, the world experienced unseasonably cool weather, brilliant sunsets, and prolonged twilights due to the spread of aerosols throughout the stratosphere. The brillant sunsets are typical of atmospheric haze. In London, the Krakatau sunsets were clearly distinct from the familiar red sunsets seen through the smoke-laden atmosphere of the city. This is demonstrated in the painting shown here of a sunset from the banks of the Thames River, created by artist William Ascroft on November 26, 1883 (Courtesy of Peter Francis). The unusual and prolonged sunsets generated considerable contemporary debate on their origin. 
PINATUBO (1991) -- Mt. Pinatubo erupted in the Philippines on June 15, 1991, and one month later Mt. Hudson in southern Chile also erupted. The Pinatubo eruption produced the largest sulfur oxide cloud this century. The combined aerosol plume of Mt. Pinatubo and Mt. Hudson diffused around the globe in a matter of months. The data collected after these eruptions show that mean world temperatures decreased by about 1 degree Centigrade over the subsequent two years. This cooling effect was welcomed by many scientists who saw it as a counter-balance to global warming.

*
ERUPTION TYPES.
This section describes the variability of eruption types, from quiescent lava emissions to extremely violent, explosive events. Eruption varibilitiy is largely related to magma composition and the amount of water present. The various eruption types are typically associated with particular volcano types. Shield volcanoes, for example, generate low-viscosity basalts associated with calm, effusive eruptions. It is common to find traditional names from classic eruptions to describe other eruptions and volcano forms: Hawaiian, Strombolian, Vulcanian, Surtseyan and Vesuvian (Plinian), for example. Although these names are somewhat poorly defined and subjectively applied, they are widely used in the volcanological literature. 
FISSURE ERUPTIONS.
FISSURE SYSTEMS AND RIFT ZONES.
Fissure eruptions should not be considered in isolation, because they are also intimately related to Hawaiian eruptions. However, the unique character of fissure eruptions warrants a separate description here.
In contrast to the point-source, centralized eruptions that typify most volcanoes, fissure eruptions are generated at several contemporaneous sites along a linear fracture, or along an en echelon (parallel, but offset) fracture system, such as that shown in the image here. Regional fracture systems can appear where the Earth's crust is broken and pulled apart by tensional forces. If these regions are underlain by reservoirs of basaltic magma, this low-viscosity melt will utilize the fractures and ascend through the crust to generate a fissure eruption. For example, Mid-oceanic riges (divergent plate margins) typically extrude basaltic magma from fissure eruptions because these are areas where global-scale extension is coincident with the rise of partially molten asthenosphere. Because Iceland is the subaerial extension of the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, it is one of the world's most active sites for basaltic fissure eruptions. For this reason, fissure eruptions are also known as Icelandic eruptions. The largest lava flow in recorded history was generated by a fissure eruption in south central Iceland in 1783. Known as the Laki flow, it erupted from a 25-kilometer-long fissure to produce 12 cubic kilometers of lava, filling two deep river valleys and covering an area greater than 500 square kilometers.
Fissure eruptions are also common on the flanks of many large volcanoes and, threfore, they are not restricted to areas undergoing regional extension. Magma-filled fissures radiating from the summit regions of active volcanoes like Mt. Etna, Mauna Loa, and Kilaeua propagate outward from the central vent system. Extrusion from these propagating fissures can produce elongate volcano morphologies, such as those that are typical of many Hawaiian shield volcanoes. Note, for example, the axial elongation of the Mauna Loa shield volcano shown in the image to the left. Mauna Loa fissure eruptions are generated along two axial rift zones connected at the Mokuaweoweo summit crater. Each rift zone is underlain by magma-filled fissures. The image here displays several lava flows radiating downslope from these axial rift zones. Most of these erupted in historic times.
ERUPTION STYLE: the "Curtain of Fire".
As fluid, gas-poor basaltic magma rises up through a fissure, it is extruded at the surface as a wall of incandescent, liquid-to-plastic fragments known as a curtain of fire. Two such eruptions are shown below from extrusive events on the Kilauea volcano, Hawaii. Fissure eruptions are quiescent, and the height of the airborne eruptive material is small, often only a few tens of meters. The basaltic fragments in the curtain of fire thus remain largely liquid when they hit the ground. These coherent lumps of hot, fluid lava are called spatter. When they land, they can be hot and fluid enough to fuse together to form an aggregate called agglutinate, or agglutinated spatter. Spatter commonly builds up as banks along the fissure sides to produce spatter ramparts.
When fissures cease to erupt, the remaining magma residing in the fissure will cool and crystallize into an igneous rock intrusion. The resulting rock structure is called a dike. Dikes are tabular in shape, and they cut discordantly across adjacent rock layers. In areas of ancient volcanism, dikes are often delineated as resistant walls standing above more easily eroded rock types.
FISSURE-FED FLOOD BASALT PROVINCES.
Massive fissure eruptions in the geological past have generated extraordinarily voluminous lava flows that form large continental flood basalt provinces. Individual provinces can cover hundreds of square kilometers, with average thicknesses of one kilometer. These flood-basalt eruptions are rare in the geologic record. They generate huge volumes of basalt over a very short time intervals, typically in only 1-2 million years. Well-known examples include (1) the Columbia River flood basalts, the bulk of which erupted from 17-14 million years ago in the northwestern United States, (2) the Deccan flood basalts, which erupted about 65 million years ago in western India, and (3) the Siberian flood basalts, which erupted about 245 million years ago in northern Siberia.
Flood-basalt eruptions are often intimately related to rifting or to stretching of the earth's crust above a region of hot mantle. This process can generate huge volumes of magma that rises through fractures to produce massive fissure eruptions on the surface. Basalt filled fissures on the Columbia Plateau, are currently exposed as dikes. About 14 million years ago, 700 cubic kilometers of basalt erupted from a single such fissure on the Columbia Plateau to form the Roza flow. The Roza flow is typical in volume to many of the larger flows in the Columbia River Basalt Province. These flow volumes dwarf the 12 cubic kilometers of the largest historic basaltic flow (the 1783 Laki flow), by more than an order of magnitude. Whereas the Laki flow advance ~40 kilometers from its source fissure, the largest of the Columbia River Basalt flows travelled up to 500 kilometers west of their source fissures. 
HAWAIIAN ERUPTIONS.
PELE: the Hawaiian Goddess of Fire.
Many native Hawaiians have a strong religous belief concerning Pele, the Hawaiian goddess of fire. According to legend, her spirit resides in the Halemaumau crater on the Kilauea volcano. At one time, she had a short and violent marriage to Kamapuaa, the god of water. As demonstrated in the painting shown here (courtsey of the artist, Herb Kane), Pele routed Kamapuaa from their Halemaumau home and, in a rage, chased him with streams of lava into the sea. This symbolism accurately portrays the often violent interaction of lava and water associated with explosive hydrovolcanic eruptions. Typically, however, Hawaiian eruptions are much more quiescent. The frequent outpouring of basaltic lava on Kilauea is a fitting reminder to the faithful that Pele is alive and well.
GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS.
Hawaiian eruptions are the calmest of the eruption types. They are characterized by the effusive emission of highly fluid basalt lavas with low gas contents. The relative volume of ejected pyroclastic material is less than that of all other eruption types. The hallmark of Hawaiian eruptions is steady lava fountaining and the production of thin lava flows that eventually build up into large, broad shield volcanoes. Eruptions are also common in central vents near the summit of shield volcanoes, and along fissures radiating outward from the summit area. Lava advances downslope away from their source vents in lava channels and lava tubes.
Fissure eruptions are common occurrences on the "Big Island" of Hawaii. They often begin as a line of vents (curatin of fire) that gives way to eruptions concentrated at one or two cental vents lying along the fissure. The Pu'u O'o eruptive series, for example, has been erupting basaltic lava on the Kilauea shield volcano since 1983. These eruptions began on January 3 with a six-kilometer-long curtain of fire on the east rift system of Kilauea. Intermittent fissure eruptions soon gave way to a centralized eruption site on the east rift, about 15 km east of the Kilauea summit caldera, which generated a scoria-and-spatter cone, called the Pu'u O'o volcano. In 1986 the Kupaianaha volcano developed about 3 kilometers farther down rift. It erupted smoothed-surface pahoehoe lava until early 1992. Since that time the main eruption site has been centered at Pu'u O'o.
The Kilauea summit caldera and east rift system are evident on the above map-view and 3D images. The blue-to-purple regions descending down the southeastern slope of Kilauea (far right) are lava flows generated during the Pu'u O'o eruptive series, through early 1994.
FIRE FOUNTAINS.
Central-vent Hawaiian eruptions are noted for their spectacular jet-like sprays of liquid lava called fire fountains. These incandescent jets ascend hundreds of meters into the air. They can occur in short spurts, or last for hours on end. One of the most spectacular fire fountaining events ever recorded on Kilauea produced a lava spray 580 m high at the Kilauea Iki vent in 1959. However, this is dwarfed by the 1600 m fire fountain generated by an Hawaiian eruption on the Japanese Island of Oshima in 1986. The top of fire fountains are often carried away downwind to produce an airborne curtain of glowing fragments that showers downward. The indivudual liquid-to-plastic fragments (clasts) generally cool quickly by radiating their heat into the atmosphere. Thus, they are chilled and solid by the time they hit the ground, where they accumulate as cindery fragments called scoria. However, during very high eruption rates, the fire fountains become so dense that the clasts can no longer radiate heat freely into the atmosphere. These clasts are kept hot by the heat of surrounding clasts. Under these conditions the molten clasts, spatter, may hit the ground and fuse together to form agglutinated spatter cones and spatter ramparts. If the eruption rates are high enough, spatter-fed flows (clastogenic lavas) may develop as hot spatter fragments blend together on the ground and flow away.
The smallest pyroclasts during fire-fountaining will be carried downwind from near the the top of the eruptive jet. They will chill quickly into small glassy black spheres, dumbells, or teardrop shapes called Pele's tears. During high winds, the teardrop shapes are sometimes drawn out as long filaments, the tails of which can break off to produce Pele's hair. During periods of high vesiculation, basalt foam can quench into the glassy rock recitulite, also known as thread-lace scoria, which has the lowest density of any know rock type.
LAVA LAKES.
The fluid basalt associated with Hawaiian eruptions sometimes ponds in vents, craters, or broad depressions to produce lava lakes. In some cases, lava may erupt from a vent located within a crater, or surface lava flow may pour into a crater or broad depression. The image shown here is a lava lake that occupied the Kupaianaha vent on the east rift system of Kilauea in 1986. Currently active lava lakes occur in only a few locations: Mt. Erebus in Antarctica, Erta' Ale in Ethiopia, and Nyiragongo in the Congo. The Kilauea volcano has had an active history of producing lava lakes in its numerous craters. Perhaps longest-lived lava lake in historic times was the near permanent lake that occupied the Halemaumau crater for most of the hundred-year period between 1823 to 1924. This lake was destroyed in 1924 by a massive hydrovolcanic eruption. As lava lakes cool, they produce a grey-silver crust that is usually only a few centimeters thick, as shown here in the image of the Kupaianaha lava lake. Active lava lakes contain young crust that is continually destroyed and regenereated. Convective motion of the underlying lava causes the crust to break into slabs and sink. This then exposes new lava at the surface that cools into a new crustal layer which will again break up into slabs and be recycled into the circulating lava beneath the crust. 
STROMBOLIAN ERUPTIONS.
Strombolian eruptions are named from the small volcano-island of Stromboli (image), located between Sicily and Italy. This volcano has been erupting almost constantly for hundreds of years. It erupts irregularly every twenty minutes or so to produce an episodic lightshow that gives rise to it's nickname, the "Lighthouse of the Mediterranean".
The term "strombolian" has been used indiscriminately to describe a variety of volcanic eruptions that vary from small volcanic blasts, to kilometer-high eruptive columns. However, true strombolian activity is characterized by short-lived, explosive outbursts of pasty lava ejected a few tens or hundreds of meters into the air. Unlike Hawaiian eruptions, Strombolian eruptions never develop a sustained eruption column. They eject relatively viscous basaltic lava from the throat of the volcano. Build up of the high gas pressures required to fragment this somewhat pasty lava, results in episodic explosions with booming blasts. Although Strombolian eruptions are much noisier than Hawaiian eruptions, they are no more dangerous. As shown in the image here, Strombolian explosions eject bomb- and lapilli-sized fragments that travel in parabollic ballistic paths before accumulating around the vent to construct the volcanic edifice. Typically, these eruptions form scoria cones composed of basaltic pryoclasts. However, mafic stratovolcanoes can also exhibit common Strombolian activity, evident for example, at Mt Eberus in Antarctica and at Stromboli itself.
Pyroclastic particles like Pele's tears, Pele's hair, and reticulite, which are common in Hawaiian eruptions, are not present in Strombolian eruptions. Spatter-fed flows are minor. Instead, Strombolian eruptions are dominated by scoria fragments, which are highly vesiculated clasts of basalt with a cindery appearance. Tephra bombs and lapilli accumulate around the vent to produce well-bedded, and often well-sorted, scoria-fall deposits
In contrast to Hawaiian eruptions, true Strombolian eruptions produce little or no flowing lava. However, during the end stages of scoria-cone formation, it is not unusual for Strombolian activity to wane and give way to the calm extrusion of basaltic lava flows. As a general rule, a'a lava flows appear to be more common than the more fluid pahoehoe types. As the vesiculating lava is de-gased toward the end of the eruption, it may ooze out from under the volcanic edifice to produce a lava flow, or pond in the vent to produce a lava lake. This will only occur if the underlying basalt is fluid enough to flow, which has not proved to be the case at Stromboli itself.
THE STROMBOLIAN ERUPTION OF PARICUTIN.
A classic example of a Strombolian-type eruption was the Paricutin eruption in 1943, about 200 miles west of Mexico City. This eruption marks the first time scientists were able to observe the complete life cycle of a volcano, from birth to extinction.
Three weeks before the Paricutin eruption occurred, the people near Paricutin village heard the rumbling noises that resembled thunder, yet they were confused because the skies were clear of clouds. The noises were associated with earthquakes at depth near Paricutin. On February 20, 1943 a farmer, Dionisio Pulido, and his wife were burning shrubbery in their cornfield when they observed the earth in front of them swell upward and crack to form a fissure 2-2.5 m across. They heard hissing sounds and later described the rise of "smoke" from the fissure, which had the repugnant smell of rotten eggs. The "rotten egg" smell is a hallmark of H2S gas, and the crack that opened in front of them was a fumarole.
Strombolian pyroclastic activity began at the site the following day and by the end of the day it generated a 40-m-high scoria cone. In one week it grew to a height of 100 m from the accumulation of bombs and lapilli, and it was raining down finer fragments that burned and eventually covered the village of Paricutin. The eruption was unusually long for a strombolian eruption, with several eruptive phases occurring over a 9-year period. After about two years of mostly pyroclastic activity the pyroclastic phase began to wane, and the outpouring of lava from the base of the cone became the dominant mode of eruption over the next 7 years. The eruption ceased in 1952. The final height of the scoria cone was 424 m. 
VULCANIAN ERUPTIONS.
The small Italian island of Vulcano, provides the family name for all volcanoes. Historic eruptions led the Romans to believe that this island was the forge of Vulcan, son of Jupiter and blacksmith to the Roman gods. Vulcano also gives its name to a particular eruption style -- vulcanian. Vulcanian eruptions initially occur as a series of discrete, short-lived (minutes to hours), canon-like explosions. However, once the volcano "clears its throat", the subsequent eruptions can be relatively quiet and sustained. Vulcanian eruptions are more explosive than Strombolian eruptions with eruptive columns commonly between 5 and 10 km. The volume of tephra produced is relatively small (less than one cubic kilometer), but dispersed over a moderately wide area. Periodic on-going vulcanian activity is currently exhibited by the Sakurajima volcano in Japan, and by the Tavurvur volcano in Papua New Guinea:
In contrast to basaltic strombolian eruptions, vulcanian eruptions are most often associated with andesitic to dacitic magma. The high viscosity of these magmas makes it difficult for the vesiculating gases to escape. This leads to the build up of high gas pressure and explosive eruptions. The ejected lava fragments do not take on the aerodynamic shapes common to Strombolian eruptions. This is partly due to the higher viscosity of the erupting magma, but also because the ejecta often incorporates a high proportion of crystalline material broken away from the rock plugging the throat of the volcano. These eruptions are often associated with growing lava domes, such as that at Mt. Pelée in 1902, and with the genration of pyroclastic flows from dome collapse.
Vulcanian deposits contain large blocks and bombs near the vent. Bread-crust bombs (left) are particularly abundant. These resemble a crusty loaf of bread broken by deep cracks that often expose a frothy interior. These large pyroclastic fragments form when viscous, gas-rich magma is ejected from the vent to produce a bomb whose exterior chills quickly to a glassy or fine-grained crust while in flight. The interior of the bomb, however, continues to vesiculate on the ground, which leads to expansion of the interior and cracking of the brittle outer crust.
Although blocks and bombs are common in proximal deposits, the bulk of Vulcanian deposits is very fine grained and dominated by ash. The abundance of ash indicates a high degree of fragmentation, which can only be generated by magmas with high gas contents. In some cases, these high gas contents are derived from heated meteoric water. It is likely, therefore, that many vulcanian eruptions are at least partially hydrovolcanic. Although the ash-fall deposits generated by volcanian eruptions are highly fragmented, they are only moderately dispersed. This suggests a high degree of explosiveness (high fragmentation) associated with the development of eruptive columns that are of only moderate heights (moderate dispersal). 
PLINIAN ERUPTIONS.
PLINY THE YOUNGER.
Plinian (or Vesuvian) eruptions typify the well-known historic eruptions that produce powerful convecting plumes of ash ascending up to 45 kilometers into the stratosphere. These explosive eruption types are named after Pliny the Younger, a Roman statesman who wrote a remarkably objective account of the eruption of Italy's Mt. Vesuvius (left) in 79 AD. Pliny's uncle, Caius Plinius (Pliny the Elder), was a much respected naturalist and Admiral in the Roman navy who died during the eruption. To properly record the circumstances of his esteemed uncle's death, Pliny the Younger wrote two letters to the historian Tactius describing the Mt. Vesuvius eruption. The eruption killed thousands of people and buried the Roman towns of Pompeii and Herculaneam under huge volumes of tephra, pyroclastic flows, and lahars. Pompeii laid buried for over 1700 years until it was rediscovered by accident during the excavation of a water line. Uncovering the remains of Pompeii has not only broadened our understanding of Plinian-type eruptions, but it has also provided a unique understanding of the lives of ordinary people during Roman times.
Mt. Vesuvius has experienced numerous Plinian eruptions since the famous eruption in 79 AD. Many of these are depicted in paintings, lithographs, and engravings. The lithograph shown here is titled "The Eruption of Vesuvius as seen from Naples, October 1822" from V. Day & Son, in G. Poullet Scrope, Masson, 1864. It exemplifies a typical Plinian column with an umbrella-shaped head

GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS.
These spectacularly explosive eruptions are associated with volatile-rich dacitic to rhyolitic lava, which typically erupts from stratovolcanoes. The duration these eruptions is highly variable, from hours to days. The longest eruptions appear to be associated with the most felsic volcanoes. Although Plinian eruptions typically invlove felsic magma, they can occassionally occur in fundamentally basaltic volcanoes where the magma chambers become differentiated and zoned to create a siliceous top. An example of this was the Hekla eruption (Iceland) of 1947-48. Over the past 800 years, Hekla has had a history of generating violent initial eruptions of pumice, lasting a few hours, followed by prolonged extrusion of basaltic lava from the lower part of the chamber.
Rather than producing the discrete explosions that are typical of Vulcanian and Strombolian eruptions, Plinian eruptions generate sustained eruptive columns. Although they differ markedly from nonexplosive Hawaiin eruptions, Plinian eruptions are similar to Hawaiian fire fountaining in that both of these eruption types generate sustained eruption plumes. In both, the eruption plumes are maintained because the growing bubbles rise at about the same rate as the magma moves up through the central vent system.
Plinian eruptions generate large eruptive columns that are powered upward partly by the thrust of expanding gases, and by convective forces with exit velocities of several hundred meters per second. Some reach heights of ~45 km. These eruptive columns produce widespread dispersals of tephra which cover large areas with an even thickness of pumice and ash (see pumice-fall deposits). The region of pyroclastic fall accumulation is generally asymmetric around the volcano as the eruptive column is carried in the direction of the prevailing wind, as shown here in this NASA image of the Klyuchevskaya eruption in 1994.
The Plinian eruption of the Klyuchevskaya volcano on Russia's Kamchatka Peninsula was captured here by the Space Shuttle Endeavor in 1994. The prevailing wind direction produced a pronounced asymmetry of the plume head. Courtesy of NASA.
The regions surrounding Plinian eruptions are not only subject to large volumes of pumice airfall (from 0.5 to 50 km3), but they are also subject to the most dangerous types of volcanic phenomena: pyroclastic flows and lahars. The occassional collapse of the eruptive column will generate hot, pyroclastic flows that advance down the volcano flanks at hurricane-force speeds. In addition, large volumes of water are often generated by the melting of snow banks and alpine glaciers during the eruption. The mixing of this water with unconsolidated tephra can generate volcanic mudflows (lahars). These features have the consistency of wet concrete, yet they can advance down slopes at the same rate as a rapidly moving stream.
The human devastation associated with the Plinian eruption of Mt. Vesuvius in 79 AD is largely attributed to all of these volcanic phenomena. Pompeii was located to the southeast, on the downwind side of the volcano. Not only was it subjected to the destructive force of several pyroclastic flows, but it was also buried under a huge thickness of airfall tephra. Although the village of Herculeaneum was also destroyed by the eruption, it was located west of the volcano, and was not subjected to the same volume of airfall tephra that buried Pompeii. Instead, Herculeneam was largely buried by pyroclastic flows and massive lahars which advanced down the volcano's western flank.
HYDROVOLCANIC ERUPTIONS.
Hydrovolcanic eruptions are generated by the intereaction of magma with either groundwater or surface water. Explosive hydrovolcanic eruptions of basaltic lava are sometimes called Surtseyan, after the eruption off Iceland in 1963. Surtseyan eruptions are considered to be the "wet" equivalents of Strombolian-type eruptions, although they are much more explosive. This high explosivity is a hallmark of hydrovolcanic activity. As the water is heated, it flashes to steam and expands explosively, thus fragmenting the magma into exceptionally fine-grained ash. When the volcanic island of Surtsey was born in the Atlantic, the initial hydrovolcanic eruptions were spectacularly explosive. As the volcano grew, however, the rising lava in the central vent interacted with water to a lesser degree, so that the waning stages of the eruption became more Strombolian in character.
Hydrovolcanic eruptions are not restricted to the underwater development of oceanic islands. Many explosive Surtseyan events are generated on land by rising conduits (diapirs) of basaltic magma that interact with water-bearing strata (e.g., aquifers) at shallow levels beneath the surface. The two examples are shown here are from Ukinrek in Alaska and Capelinhos in the Azores.
Note the radial cloud emanating from the base of the Capelinhos eruptive column. This phenomenon is a base surge, a characteristic feature of many Surtseyan-type eruptions. These surges are analagous to the ring-shaped, ground-hugging clouds that travel radially away from the vertical columns generated by nuclear explosions. Base surges are derived from the gravitational collapse of the "wet" eruptive column, which is denser than those associated with "dry" eruptions. Base surge deposits are wedge-shaped, with their thickest end near the vent. Dune-shaped deposits are common near the vent, indicated lateral transport analagous to the lateral movement and deposition of sand grains along the face of a moving sand dune. The bedding is often disrupted by "bomb sags" containing large ejected blocks which followed ballistic trajectories unrelated to the lateral surge. Spherical accumulations of wet, accreted ash, called accretionary lapilli, are also common to many base surge deposits.
HYDROVOLCANIC VENTS: Maars and Tuff Rings.
Hydrovolcanic explosions generate maars and tuff rings. These vent types are large circular depressions with low rims of ejected debris. Maars are excavated into the substrate, thus exposing older rocks along their inner walls. Tuff rings, however, are built above the substrate. Maars contain a greater proportion of fragmented basement rocks in the ejecta blanket. This suggests that maars are derived from steam blasts (phreatic eruptions) generated well above the diapiric intrusion. Tuff rings, on the other hand, contain a greater proportion of magmatic (juvenile) fragments (see for example, palagonite tuff). Such deposits are consistent with explosions derived from a combination of heated groundwater and vesiculating magma (phreatomagmatic eruptions) from relatively shallower intrusions.
Circular-shaped maars and tuff rings appear to be generated above rising columns of magma (diapirs). However, if the magma rises along a linear fracture zone, the interaction with groundwater may result in the reaming out of the fissure. Such eruptions can be even more destructive than those associated with maars and tuff rings, as exemplified by the highly explosive Tarawera eruption which buried three villages and killed 150 people on New Zealand's North Island in 1886.
LITTORAL CONES.
Although littoral cones have a hydrovolcanic orgin, they are not true hydrovolcanic vents. They are composed of basalt tephra that accumulate as ejected debris from the explosive interaction of moving lava and seawater. Although pahoehoe flows generally enter the water in a relatively passive manner, a'a flows often enter the sea explosively to produce cone-shaped piles of ejected debris. The irregular cracks bounding cindery blocks of a'a allow water to penetrate into the interior of the hot flow where it then flashes to steam explosively. Basalt exiting from lava tubes can also generate littoral cones from episodic explosions due to disruption of the lava stream by incoming waves or swells. The littoral cones that develop from these explosive ejections are typically open on the seaward side.

*
VOLCANISM ON OTHER WORLDS.
The Apollo missions to the moon in the 1960's set the stage for space exploration in the 1970's, 80's, and 90's through the Mariner, Pioneer, Viking, Voyager, Magellan, and Galileo missions. The data gathered by these missions has greatly expanded our knowledge of volcanism on other worlds. Volcanic features comparable to those on earth are particularly well exposed on the Earth's Moon, Mars, Venus, and the Jovian moon, Io. The most stunning discoveries of the 1990's are the great variety of spectacular volcanic features displayed by radar imagery of Venus, and the dramatic discovery of perennial eruptions on Jupiter's satellite Io.
VOLCANISM ON THE MOON.
LUNAR HIGHLANDS AND MARIA
The moon contains a ~70-km-thick basaltic crust that differentiated from a denser, underlying mantle at least 4.4 billion years ago. The crustal rocks returned by the Apollo Mission range in age from 4.3 to 3.1 billion years old. In contrast, the oldest rocks on earth are rarely more than 3 billion years old. The lunar crust is easily discernible into two primary types of terrains: the older highlands, which comprise about 83% of the lunar surface (light regions in image), and the younger lunar maria, which comprise the remaining 17% (dark regions). The heavily cratered highlands are covered with a layer of regolith, a mixture of fine dust and fragmented debris generated by meteorite impacts. Beneath the regolith, two crustal rocks types dominate the highlands:
(1) breccia -- a coherent rock of broken and welded fragments, and
(2) anorthosite -- the most abundant highlands rock; it is a feldspar-rich variety of gabbro (which, in turn, is the coarse-grained, equivalent of basalt)
Compared with the highlands, the lunar maria (mare, singular) are much darker and have relatively smooth surfaces. The maria are more abundant on the near side of the moon, where they cover about 30% of the lunar surface; on the far side they cover only about 2%. The reason for this is not well understood. Each mare is composed of vast sheets of basaltic lava which erupted from the broken crust associated with large impact craters. There is no evidence to suggest that the impact events triggered the volcanic eruptions. However, the fractures associated with large impact craters may have provided easy egress for younger, mantle-derived melts to rise to the surface. In a sense, these extensive lava fields are the lunar equivalents of terrestrial flood basalt provinces. The maria range in thickness from 1-4 km.
Mare Basalt -- This sample of mare basalt, ~3.7 billion years old, was collected by Apollo 17 astronauts. The small holes in the sample are vesicles, which formed by the degassing of the lava as it cooled. Courtesy of NASA.
GENESIS AND EVOLUTION OF THE LUNAR CRUST.
The highlands anorthosite is dominated by the mineral plagioclase feldspar. The most popular model for crustal evolution suggests that the anorthosite crystallized early in the moon's formation from a global magma ocean. Under this scenario, the lighter plagioclase floated upward to form an anorthosite crust, and the heavier minerals olivine and pyroxene sank toward the bottom of the magma ocean to form the moon's upper mantle. The greatest volume of the highland crust was generated between 4.5 and 3.9 billion years ago (bya), but it continued to develop up to ~ 3.2 bya. Episodic melting of the mantle rocks beneath the highland crust generated the younger mare basalts. Heavy bombardment of the lunar crust in its early stages of formation (4.5-3.2 bya) provided fractures for rapid ascent of these mantle melts and depressions for them to pond in. The greatest volume of the mare basalts erupted from 3.9 to 3.2 bya, but reduced bombardment and basaltic volcanism continued until ~2.0 bya. Since ~2.0 bya, there has been only very minor eruptions, local degassing, and occasional impacts.
VOLCANIC FEATURES.
High-resolution photographs of Mare Imbrium reveal spectacular lava flow fronts, extending as much as 1200 km from their source vents. However, these features appear to be unique to Mare Imbrium. Most other mares have smooth surfaces upon which discrete flows cannot be recognized. These are probably composed of compound flows composed of numerous thin flow units.
The mare lava flows are associated with a number of volcanic vents, in the form of domes and scoria cones. The domes are typically found in clusters. They are circular to elliptical, typically a few kilometers across and several hundred meters high. The basaltic domes on the moon appear to be the lunar equivalents of shield volcanoes found on earth. Construction of the relatively steep slopes of the lunar "shields" is poorly understood. Their steep slopes are probably not related to the extrusion of relatively viscous basalt, but rather to the style of extrusion, which may involve eruptions of short duration mixed with minor episodes of ash eruption. The lunar scoria cones are similar in size to terrestrial scoria cones, and they appear to be associated with older fissure systems.
A common and intriguing volcanic landform found in the lunar maria are narrow, winding valleys called sinuous rilles. These range in width from tens of meters to 3 km, and in length from a few kilometers to 300 km. Many originate in irregular craters. One of the largest of these rilles is Hadley Rille in the Imbrium basin, which was visited by Apollo 15 astronauts. Although most workers believe that the sinuous rilles are a combination of lava channels and collapsed lava tubes. However, the mode of lava channel formation remains controversial. Some believe that the channels are "constructional" due to the build up of lava levees along the sides of the channel. However, the majority of the sinuous rilles are thought to the product of thermal erosion of the mare surface by exceptionally hot, fluid lava.
VOLCANISM ON MARS.
OVERVIEW.
Mars, "the red planet," derives its name from the Roman god of war. With a diameter of 6,794 km, it is about half the size of the earth. Like earth, it contains a thin crust overlain by a rocky, partially molten mantle. The crustal rocks are composed of basaltic lavas. Although Mars may have been tectonically active in its early history, there is no evidence of geologically recent horizontal motion similar to plate tectonic motion on earth. Volcanism on Mars may be partly derived from the melting of hot mantle plumes. The lack of lateral motion means that these mantle hotspots would remain fixed relative to the Martian surface. This mechanism may account for regional uplift and volcanism at several sites on the Tharsis bulge, the extensive light-colored region on the west side of the image shown here. The Tharsis bulge is associated with a number of exceptionally large volcanoes, which show as dark red spots on the western side of the image. The enormous Valles Marineris canyon system is visible in the center of the image, east of the Tharsis bulge. This huge feature contains numerous canyons, with depths from 2 to 7 km, exposed over a distance of 4500 km (for a close-up view, double-click Valles Marineris). The Marineris canyons were not eroded by running water, but rather by stretching and cracking of the crust during mantle-plume uplift of the Tharsis bulge. However, there is clear evidence of ancient water erosion on Mars, which may date back to nearly 4 billion years ago.
There have been 23 scientific missions to Mars, which include Martian flybys, orbiters, and unmanned landings. The first spacecraft to land on Mars was Mariner 4 in 1965, followed by Viking 1 in 1976 and Mars Pathfinder in 1997.
VOLCANIC FEATURES.
The volcanic features on Mars are very similar in shape, but not in scale, to those found on earth, and they probably formed by similar processes. In contrast to the volcanic features found on the moon, those on Mars were generated on terrains of variable ages. Thus, volcanism has been an important process throughout Martian history. Numerous volcanic landforms can be found in the older cratered highlands and in the younger volcanic plains surrounding them. However, the most impressive volcanic landforms are associated with the extensive, hotspot-related uplifts of Tharsis and Elysium plateaus. The volcanic features described below include the giant central volcanoes, peterae, tholi, and rootless cones.
GIANT CENTRAL VOLCANOES.
The most spectacular volcanic features on Mars are the isolated, giant basaltic shield volcanoes called Montes (singular Mons), Latin for mountain. The largest of these are four giant shield volcanoes associated with Tharsis uplifted region (for a close-up view of two of these, double-click Tharsis Shields). All four dwarf the Mauna Loa shield volcano, the largest mountain on earth. The largest of the four is Olympus Mons, shown in the image here. Olympus Mons is the largest volcano in the solar system, with a base diameter of ~600 km and 25 km of relief from the summit to the plains surrounding it abrupt basalt scarp (see image).
These large basaltic shield volcanoes contain large central calderas and gentle slopes that extend outward at angles usually less than five degrees. The volcano flanks have radial surface textures formed from lava channels and long narrow flows.
The large scale of the Tharsis shield volcanoes suggests that they formed from massive eruptions of fluid basalt over prolonged periods of time. Similar eruptions on earth are associated with flood basalt provinces and mantle hotspots. However, on earth the source region for hotspot volcanism moves laterally as lithospheric plates travel across the stationary mantle plumes beneath them. Without this mechanism of lateral movement, the Martian surface remains above the plume source so that huge volumes of lava will erupt from a single central vent over many millions of years of activity, thus generating a single shield volcano of enormous volume. With this in mind, it is interesting to note that the volume of Olympus Mons is roughly equivalent to the total volume of basalt in the Hawaiian-Emperor seamount chain.
THOLI AND PATERAE.
Compared with the Mons volcanoes, Tholi and Peterae are much smaller volcanic vents. A Tholus volcano is an isolated domal mountain with a central crater, having slopes that are usually steeper than those associated with both Mons and Peterae volcanoes. A Patera volcano is dominated by an irregular or complex caldera with scalloped edges, surrounded by very gentle slopes of usually less than one degree. The lower flanks of both Tholi and Paterae are often buried by more recent volcanic plains. This suggests that some of these volcanoes may be the tops of buried shield volcanoes. Several Tholi and Paterae volcanoes contain sinuous channels carved into their flanks, probably by hot effusive lava flows. Some researchers, however, suggest that the channels were eroded by pyroclastic flows. The scoured flanks of many Tholi and Paterae suggest that they may indeed be associated with a component of pyroclastic activity, in contrast to the massive effusive activity associated with Mons-type eruptions.
ROOTLESS CONES AND PSUEDOCRATERS?
High-resolution images from the Mars Global Surveyor have revealed numerous, small cone-shaped structures (< 250 m in diameter) superimposed on the surface of fresh lava flows. However, none of the cones appears to be the source of erupted lava. Similar volcanic features on earth are said to be "rootless," in that they are not positioned above a magma source. Some researchers suggest that these small structures were produced by the interaction of molten lava with a water-rich source. This idea has stimulated a significant amount of interest because, if true, these Martian psuedocraters may mark the locations of shallow water or ice at the time the lava was emplaced.
VOLCANISM ON VENUS.
OVERVIEW.
Although Venus is similar to Earth in size, mass, and density, its surface environment is hostile, with mean surface temperatures of 475 degrees Centigrade, a lack of water, and a thick atmosphere dominated by CO2 gas. More than 98% of the Venusian surface has been mapped at a resolution of about 100 meters by NASA's Magellan mission in 1990 through 1994. Regional variations in surface height are shown in the image left, where highlands are depicted in white to tannish colors, uplands in greenish colors, and lowlands in bluish colors. The entire surface of Venus is younger than expected due to a massive resurfacing event associated with flood basalt volcanism. These vast lava plains are best preserved in the lowland regions. The relative ages of impact craters on the lava plains suggest that this voluminous outpouring of basalt could be as young as 300 million years ago, or as old as 1600 million years ago. All of the well-developed volcanic features discussed below appear to be younger than the global resurfacing event.
VOLCANIC FEATURES.
The lack of water erosion on Venus adds to the preservation of volcanic edifices on the planet's surface. Thus far over 1700 volcanic centers have been identified on Venus. These vary greatly in size, shape, and in the nature of eruptive activity. Most of these landforms can be subdivided into one of the following catagories: central-vent volcanoes, domes, ticks, calderas, coronae, and arachnoids.
CENTRAL-VENT VOLCANOES.
Central-vent volcanoes are characterized by the radially dispersed lava flows extruded from near the summit of a well-defined, generally circular, volcanic edifice. These volcanoes are highly variable in size, although most have diameters <100 km. Most, but not all, of the Venusian volcanoes resemble shield volcanoes on earth. Two of the largest of these are Sif Mons (2 km high and 200 km in diameter) and Sapas Mons (1.5 km high and 400 km in diameter):
VOLCANIC DOMES.
Over 152 volcanic domes have been recognized on Venus. Most are circular in form and steep sided, with one or more summit craters and radial fractures. Their upper surfaces, however, vary from convex to exceptionally flat. Venusian domes are much larger than their terrestrial counterparts, with diameters ranging from 20 to 30 km and heights averaging about 300 meters. The flat-topped domes on Venus are sometimes referred to as pancake domes:
The composition of the domes on Venus is unknown. Although their smooth surfaces are consistent with basaltic compositions, their steep sides suggest that they are composed of viscous lava, consistent with high-silica, rhyolitic compositions. The concentric and radial fracture pattern shown by many domes (see above) is consistent with the stretching of dome surfaces during their formation as lava wells up from interior vents and spreads laterally on the surface.
TICKS.
A group of enigmatic volcanic edifices, referred to as ticks, are similar in some respects to volcanic domes in that they are circular, steep-sided, and of similar diameter. They differ, however, in their association with lava flows that breach one or more sides of the structure. The west side of the image shown here, for example, contains dark flows that emanate from a shallow summit crater and traveled west along a lava channel. The origin of these structures is not well understood. Ticks are generally associated with rift zones. One theory suggests that they are generated by dome formation within a rift, followed by localized extrusion of lava along one of the rift fractures. Thus far, about 50 such ticks have been mapped on the surface of Venus.
CALDERAS.
The term caldera is used here to describe circular to oblong depressions formed by surface collapse, similar to those found on earth. Like their terrestrial counterparts, they are associated with numerous, closely spaced ring fractures along the topographic rim of the structure. A total of 97 calderas have thus far been identified on Venus. Most range from 60-80 km in diameter, with depths up to several kilometers. In many cases, the caldera floors are covered with post-collapse lava flows. 
CORONAE AND ARACHNOIDS.
Coronae are immense circular to oblong structures, generally between 200 and 250 km in diameter, although some can be as large as 1100 km across. These features appear to be unique to Venus. They have positive topographic expressions, with a surrounding moat or trough, and typical heights of more than 2 km above the surrounding plains. Their interiors, however, can be either topographically positive (dome-shaped) or negative (bowl-shaped). They are further characterized by closely spaced ring-shaped ridges or partially closed fractures. Radial fractures may also be present. The interiors of most coronae contain numerous, smaller volcanic features, such as lava flows, calderas, shield volcanoes, domes, and lava channels. 
The genesis of coronae appears to be associated with the arrival large mantle plumes beneath the Venusian lithosphere. The progressive evolution of these features involves both uplift and collapse, either concurrently, in sequence, or in cycles. Ring fractures develop as the surface bulges outward above the rising mantle plume, but subsequent relaxation of the uplift often results in collapse of the corona's interior along the concentric fractures. The abundant volcanic features found in the interior reflect melting of the plume head and subsequent extrusion of these melts at the surface. Thus far, 208 separate coronae have been identified.
Arachnoids are smaller than most coronae, but have a similar genesis. They features differ from coronae in that they contain a network of both radial and concentric structures that gives the appearance of a spider sitting on interconnected webs of bright lines, hence the name arachnoid, which is Greek for spider. The radial structures appear to be dike intrusions that stand out as ridges. Although it is thought that both coronae and arachnoids form in association with rising plumes of mantle, the magmatism associated with arachnoids may be largely intrusive, whereas magmatism associated with coronae is largely extrusive. There have been 265 arachnoids thus far identified on Venus. 
VOLCANISM ON IO.
OVERVIEW.
The spectacular planetary body Io is the innermost moon of Jupiter, and the most volcanically active body in the solar system. It is the only body outside the earth to exhibit active volcanism on a massive scale. The first images to arrive from the Voyager 1 spacecraft as it passed by Io in 1979 astounded the scientific community by revealing active volcanic plumes rising up to 300 km above Io's surface. As additional images arrived from the Hubble Space Telescope and the Galileo spacecraft (1996-2000), we have come to realize that this remarkable body is dotted by hundreds of volcanic centers, about 70 of which are active. As shown in the image here, Io's surface is extraordinarily colorful, with yellows, oranges, reds, and blacks reflecting compositionally diverse eruptions, from great outpourings of basaltic lava to massive deposits of sulfur. The lack of impact craters on Io's surface is consistent with a young period of vigorous volcanism, which has buried older structures with lava, sulfur, and pyroclastic materials forming the dimpled, variegated crust we see today.
ACTIVE VOLCANIC PLUMES.
The first images obtained from Voyager 1 in 1979 showed a strange umbrella-shaped feature that appeared to be protruding from Io's surface. Soon it was realized that the feature was an eruption plume, largely composed of SO2 gas, rising 260 km above the surface. Additional Voyager images revealed additional volcanic plumes. A total of 15 active plumes have now been identified from the images obtained through the Voyager and Galileo Missions, two of which are shown here:
Spacraft instruments have provided us with important data on the nature of these explosive eruptions. Voyager's Infra-red Interferometer Spectrometer (IRIS) indicates that most of the active plumes correspond with anomalously hot areas on Io's surface. Data from Galileo's Near-Infrared Mapping Spectormeter (NIMS) appears to suggest that many of these high-temperature explosive eruptions are driven by SO2 gas emission, whereas others appear to be driven by volatilized sulfur emission. In contrast, explosive eruptions on earth are driven largely by H2O and CO2 gas emission.
THE CHANGING FACE OF IO.
Unlike the surface of most other planetary bodies, the extensive volcanic activity on Io can generate dramatic changes to it's surface over very short timescales. The colored surface is largely covered by volcanic plains composed of overlapping lava flows and volcanic plume deposits dominated by pyroclastic particles composed largely of condensed SO2 frost, sulfur, and in places, subordinate silicate tephra.
PYROCLASTIC DEPOSITS.
The red deposits on Io appear to represent young, ephemeral SO2-rich pyroclastic material that will last perhaps only a few years before turning yellow or bright white. The lighter colored SO2 frost is probably coarser grained than the younger, red-colored SO2. The yellow ring in the image to the left was deposited by the volcanic plume Prometheus which has been an active site of volcanism for over 20 years. Over this time, the source of plume has shifted 70 km to the west. Most scientists believe that the source for this long-lived plume is from a vent lying at the west end of the dark lava flow in the image. However, there is some speculation that the plume might be a product of the advancing lava as it flows over and volatilizes the SO2-rich surface.
An example of a spectacular ring of red pyroclastic debris comes from the active volcanic plume Pele, shown in the two Galileo images below. These images were taken less than six months apart. Note the dramatic change that has occurred over this time period near the volcano Pillan Petera, marked by the red arrow. The April image shows the simple caldera of Pillan Petra located within the red pyroclastic ring of the Pele plume. However, the September image shows a circular, dark deposit about 400 km in diameter surrounding the caldera. The dark deposit covers an area about as large as the state of Arizona and is most likely composed of silicate-rich pyroclastic material.
LAVA FLOWS AND FLOW FIELDS.
Lava flows are also rapidly changing the face of Io. A spectacular example of active lava production is demonstrated in the second pair of images shown below. These images, taken three months apart, lie within a chain of giant calderas known as Tvashtar Catena. The November 1999 image on the left displays a fissure eruption (arrow) that appears to be generating a "curtain of fire" which is a typical feature displayed by many Hawaiian-type eruptions on Earth. The fissure shown here is about 40 km long and the "curtain of fire" extruding from it appears to rise about 1.5 kilometers above the surface. The eruption appears to be associated with the generation of active lava flows at the base of the fissure. The second image, to the right, was taken three months later in the February 2000. At this time, the site of volcanism has shifted to the west (arrow) to generate a lava flow that is over 60 km long.
Lava flows on Io have many of the same characteristics as the low-viscosity basaltic lava flows found on earth, as demonstrated in the images below. The Amirani and Maui lava flows (lefthand image) are the longest active lava flows known to exist in the solar system. The flows travel down lava channels that extend more than 250 km away from a common vent. The white deposits that encircle the vent are probably SO2-rich vapors that were ejected above the surface where they froze as solid particles that settled to the ground as snow or frost.
The righthand image (above) displays the lava flowfield of Culann Patera. These flows spill out on all sides of a central caldera. The variegated colors of the flows are most likely related to the interaction of the hot lava with SO2-rich debris on the ground surface as well as SO2-rich ash fall. Some of these silicate lavas might be invasive flows that have been colored by interaction with the overlying sulfur-rich deposits.
The region confined to the yellow box the image above is blown up in the image shown here. The summit caldera of Culann Patera appears to be the source of a lava tube that feeds the large, dark green flow to the west. The axis of the western part of the flow is marked by what appears to skylights lying above the tube's continuation. These features are typical of basalt lavas found on Earth.
WHAT IS THE COMPOSITION OF THE LAVAS ON IO?
Lava composition is partly a function of the temperature of the melt. Data from Galileo's NIMS instrument indicates that the average temperature of active lavas on Io is about 1600 degrees Centigrade. There has been some speculation that some of the lavas may be composed of liquid sulfur. Sulfur, however, boils vigorously on Io's surface at at about 500 degrees Centigrade. Therefore, the lavas on Io are certainly of a silicate composition. High-temperature lavas on earth have a mafic composition (rich in magnesium and relatively depleted in silica). The extraordinarily high temperatures of the lavas on Io suggest that they are of an ultramafic composition. The eruption of ultramafic lavas on Earth has been rare in the recent geologic past. However, such lavas were common in the early history of the Earth (~2.0 to ~4.5 billion years ago) when the Earth's internal heat content was much greater. These hot, ultramafic lavas are capable of melting other rock types as they travel on planetary surfaces. Thermal erosion by ultramafic lavas are probably responsible for generating the sinuous rilles we see on the moon, and similar featuers may yet be found on Io.


<#TIM>
*
27 September 1990

Magellan strips the veil off Venus / Overseas news 

By Nigel Hawkes, Science Editor


VENUS is a far more active planet than astronomers suspected, with deep craters, huge pools of solidified lava, unexplained criss-cross patterns and evidence of mountains rising and crumbling. 

Ten days of radar mapping by the Magellan spacecraft has revealed more details of the planet's surface, lying beneath dense, corrosive clouds, than all previous missions combined. Scientists at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, are delighted. James Head, a geologist from Brown University, said: ``It is giving us a revolutionary new view of Venus.'' 

After losing radio contact with the spacecraft twice during August, engineers at the Californian laboratory regained control and the Magellan began mapping the planet on September 15, two weeks behind schedule. By yesterday it had completed 82 mapping orbits in the first ten days of a planned 243-day mission. Among the surprises was a river of solidified lava almost a mile wide and 200 miles long, spreading into a wide lava pool. Another picture shows a caldera, a crater caused by the collapse of the summit of a volcano, which, at two miles, is deeper than any other in the solar system. The surface is pitted with impact craters, 20 to 50 miles across, where meteorites penetrated the dense atmosphere. Rims, terraced walls and central peaks are similar to those on the Moon and Mars. 

One curious feature is a set of lines running parallel across the surface of the planet about a mile apart, intersected by another set half a mile apart. Scientists speculate that this pattern was created by the stretching of Venus's crust. 

*

16 June 1991

Doomsday eruptions rock the Philippines / Overseas news 

by Jon Swain, Far East Correspondent

A LETHAL combination of volcanic eruptions, earthquakes and a tropical storm sent tens of thousands of Filipinos fleeing in terror yesterday beneath a poisonou rain of ash, mud and pumice stone. 

Officials ordered the inhabitants of three cities to evacuate after scientists warned that so much pressure was building in Mount Pinatubo that the volcano could blow apart with ``devastating'' consequences. 

The volcano, 60 miles north of the capital, Manila, rumbled ominously yesterday, spewing out stones and ash and forcing the evacuation of several nearby towns and an American military base. 

Occasional thundering explosions from the volcano shot debris more than 12 miles into the sky. Ash and stones the size of tennis balls rained down as thousands fled on foot, using umbrellas and towels over their heads as protection. 

Explosions from the volcano have increased in magnitude throughout the week and are now described by scientists as phenomenal. ``It's like doomsday,'' said hotel owner Richard Dizon in Angeles, a few miles from Pinatubo, which had been dormant for six centuries until last weekend. 

Another resident, Erlinda David, 60, said he had braved a heavy downpour of sand and stones. ``We thought burning rocks would fall on us. We were scared we'd be buried by boulders, so we abandoned the house.'' 

In Manila, the sky turned dark three hours before sunset and cars were coated in a fine white snowfall-like shower of powder. The typhoon compounded the devastation caused by high winds and torrential rain. 

Earthquakes, one measuring 4.1 on the Richter scale, added to the misery. 

Scientists said it was not clear whether the tremors were linked to the volcanic eruptions. 

At least one person was killed and 12 were injured when three bridges and two bus depots collapsed from the weight of sodden ash or from the quakes. 

The heavy rains increased fears of mudslides terrifying rivers of boulders, earth and ash that destroy everything in their path. Some slides were reported to have hit Angeles. One destroyed a bridge, sending a mini-bus toppling and enveloping it in mud. It is not yet known whether any lives were lost. Blackouts and transport problems have hampered the efforts of disaster agencies to monitor accurately the human toll. 

America's Clark air base, in Angeles, one of the biggest in the world and from which nearly all personnel had been ordered to leave earlier in the week, was left almost empty after most of the last 1,000 troops guarding the installation left. 

A military spokesman said weapon systems housed in underground bunkers were safe from the exploding volcano. The eruption has, in effect, closed the base, probably for good. The spokesman said an evacuation had not yet been ordered at another base threatened by the volcano, Subic naval base near Olongapo. Many of the people who fled from Clark are now at Subic. 

Panic buying was reported across the northern Philippines. Bar girls from the taverns and massage parlours near the American base at Subic crowded into shops, wearing cocktail dresses or hot pants, to buy up food. 

Scientists warned that a two-mile fissure had appeared on the volcano, indicating the possibility of even bigger eruptions.``We are picturing a worst-case scenario,'' said Ronaldo Arboleda of the Philippine Institute of Vulcanology and Seismology. In a radio address urging people to flee, he said: ``The situation is really dangerous. We are not gods, but based on our studies something not good is about to happen.'' 

The danger zone was expanded from 18 to 24 miles around the volcano, including the cities of Angeles, San Fernando and Olongapo. At least 18 people have been killed and scores have been injured since Pinatubo started erupting last Sunday. 

There had been fears that communist rebels might try to take advantage of the situation by ambushing American servicemen fleeing from Clark. Instead, they declared a ceasefire yesterday in areas affected by the eruption. 

Fidel Ramos, the defence secretary, called on Manila's residents to remain calm. He said the ``unusual'' weather conditions would end by today, when the typhoon is expected to have passed into the South China sea. 

A strong earthquake hit a mountainous region in the southern Russian republic of Georgia yesterday, killing six people and damaging nine villages. It occurred near the area hit by an earthquake in April, which killed more than 100 people. 

*
18 June 1991

Volcano could change climate / Overseas news 

Philippines volcano

From Vaudine England in Manila and Nigel Hawkes, Science Editor



AS 14,000 Filipinos went to government evacuation centres in Manila in one day to escape the eruption of Mount Pinatubo, scientists said the eruption could affect the world's climate for the next two years, lowering average temperatures by s fifth of a degree Celsius and increasing rainfall in some places. 

The volcano was simmering yesterday and its violence had subsided but vulcanologists were not ruling out the possibility of further explosions. 

Hundreds of thousands have fled their homes in recent days. Fears of a rumoured tidal wave set off a new stream of evacuees on crowded and often impassable roads. 

At least 164 people are said to have been killed, although some estimates suggest at least 200. About 5,000 Americans were moved out of the country from the American naval base at Subic Bay. 

Scientists who study the effect of volcanoes on the weather say that the effect of the eruption on the world's climate depends on how much ash and sulphur have been injected into the upper atmosphere, and how high they have gone. In the next few days, satellites will be used to study the plumes from Pinatubo and measure the sulphur concentrations. 

Sulphur is the important element because it is converted into tiny white particles of sulphuric acid which reflect the sunlight, Alan Robock of the university of Maryland said yesterday. Dr Robock studied the aftermath of the eruption of the Mexican volcano El Chichon in April 1982 and suspects that we may be in for a repeat performance. 

The particles cool the earth by reflecting back a small proportion of the light from the sun. They have no effect, however, on the heat radiated by the earth, so their effect is to bring about a small cooling. 

After El Chichon, the cooling effect was quite noticeable in British weather statistics, as was increased rainfall. Mick Kelly of the Climatic Research Unit at the University of East Anglia studied the records and found lower temperatures in all but one of the 28 months after the eruption. He also found evidence of increased rainfall for the first year. 

Earlier eruptions are also known to have affected the weather. The most famous was the eruption of Tambora in Indonesia in 1815, followed by the ``year without a summer'' in Britain. The explosion of Krakatoa in 1883 produced brilliant sunsets, and some weather effects, though less pronounced than in 1816. According to Dr Robock, the parallels with El Chichon are close. 


*
18 September 1993 TM/p.3

Eruptions Of Joy 
Findings



An Underwater submarine detector system developed by the US Navy has been used to spot a volcano erupting under the sea. The discovery was about 1.5 miles under the pacific Ocean, about 270 miles off the Oregon coast. 

``This is what we've been looking for,'' says Steve Hammond, of the National Oceanic Atmospheric Administration. ``Scientifically, it's very significant. This is an example of the most common volcanic eruption on this planet, but it has never been seen in action before.'' 

Sources:Science, NOAA, Scientific American. 

*
04 February 1993 p.9

Death toll rises to 48 in volcano steam blast

Mayon volcano, Philippines

By Abby Tan in Manila, and Our Foreign Staff

RESCUE workers searching the foot of Mayon volcano in the Philippines discovered another 17 bodies yesterday, taking the death toll from Tuesday's violent steam blast to 48. 

Rescue co-ordinator Sedric Daep said most of the bodies were found in the fields around the base of the volcano, which scientists warned could erupt at any time. The 48 killed were caught in a superheated cloud of steam and mud when the volcano burst back into life after lying dormant for eight years. 

Lava began to ooze from the 7,940-ft peak yesterday and vulcanologists warned there was a danger of a ``hazardous explosive eruption'' within hours. ``What we are seeing are possibly precursors to a major eruption,'' chief government vulcanologist Raymundo Punongbayon said. The scientists interpreted the collapse of a 100-yd gully wall on the volcano's flank as a sign that molten rock is close to the surface. 

More than 20,000 people fled their homes around the peak and officials warned people to stay outside a four-mile exclusion zone. 

President Ramos declared a state of calamity in Albay province, allowing officials to regulate the price of commodities and commandeer vehicles needed for rescue work. 

Some of the injured were flown to Manila because their burns were too serious to be treated in Legaspi city, which is closer to the volcano. Most of those killed and injured were caught in the open. A survivor, Dominga Edalia, 51, said the explosion came suddenly. ``Some sort of black sand came down,'' she said. ``I took my children and we ran away.'' Her husband and three sons, who were tending a farm on the volcano slopes, were among the injured. 

Three foreign tourists, two Germans and an Israeli, who had been climbing the mountain and were reported missing, were later found safe. 

*
03 February 1993 p.19

Professor Geoff Brown / Obituaries 



Geoff Brown, Professor of Earth Sciences at the Open University and pioneer of gravimetric measurements for predicting volcanic eruptions, died in the crater of the Colombian volcano Galeras on January 14 aged 47. He was born on March 11, 1945. 

GEOFF Brown died while putting to the test his own technique for measuring the mood of a volcano. Together with other specialists he was visiting Galeras, the most active volcano in Colombia, to help establish a monitoring programme designed to provide early warning of eruptions to people living in the nearby town of Pasto. 

When the volcano erupted, Brown was inside the crater, and stood little chance. At least eight others were also killed in the eruption, perhaps triggered by recent heavy rainfall. No more eloquent example could be provided of the erratic and unpredictable nature of volcanoes, and of the need for the methods Brown was helping to develop. 

Geoffrey Charles Brown gained his BSc and PhD degrees from Manchester University in 1966 and 1970, specialising in the behaviour of molten granites. In 1971 he went to Liverpool University, and his connection with the Open University began in 1973 when he started acting as a part-time tutor to OU students. In 1977 he moved full time to the OU, was appointed professor of earth sciences in 1982, and became head of department in 1983. 

Under his leadership an already flourishing department expanded and gained growing recognition. In 1989 the Universities' Funding Council listed the department as one of the top seven earth science departments in the UK, though this success did not lead to increased funding because the OU was not supported by the council. Instead he sought support from the OU and outside sources, raising enough to build the new Wolfson Earth Science Laboratories, the first specifically for research purposes on the OU campus, which were recently opened by the Secretary of State for the Environment, Michael Howard. 

He was a prolific and gifted teacher, and a skilful administrator, serving for the past four years as chairman of the university's research committee. With Alan Mussett he wrote a text on geophysics and geochemistry (The Inaccessible Earth) and with Richard Thorpe another on The Field Description of Igneous Rocks. In 1986 he presented the results of his volcano monitoring research on a Horizon programme, The Magma Chamber. 

This work, unique in the UK, attracted considerable international interest and established the OU as a centre of world importance in volcanic research. Brown's speciality was the use of sensitive gravity meters to detect minute changes in the density of the ground beneath the volcano, such as might be caused by the movements of molten rock and gas in the period before an eruption. 

The method showed great promise and, working at Mount Etna, Brown and his colleague Hazel Rymer had shown that small changes in density can indeed be detected before and during eruptions, and can provide information not available from seismic data or measurements of surface distortion. 

He was a man of boundless and infectious enthusiasm. He himself contributed to more than 70 research papers, supervised 12 PhD students, and headed a department responsible for the training of the equivalent of 1,000 full-time students. Yet he always had an eye for smaller details. 

He leaves a wife, Evelyn, a geologist and staff tutor in science at the OU's Nottingham regional office, and three grown-up daughters. 

*
20 January 1993 p.15

Tweaking the dragon's tail.

Modern Times.

Nigel Hawkes;
The death of Professor Geoff Brown in Colombia proves once again that vulcanologists dice with danger. 

The hot breath of volcanoes carries with it an unmistakable whiff of excitement and danger: even scientists are not immune.. 

Last week a group of vulcanologists, tempted down inside the crater of a volcano in southern Colombia, paid a terrible price when it erupted. 

Incandescent rocks flung from the crater rained down on them, and they were engulfed by a cloud of dust and gas. At least nine people lost their lives, including one of Britain's experts on volcanoes, Professor Geoff Brown, of the Open University. 

His body has not been recovered from the Galeras volcano, but hope that he is still alive has been abandoned. Torrential rain has hampered rescue efforts, and a full count of those who died has yet to be made. Nobody seems quite sure how many were on the volcano last Thursday, during a field trip arranged as part of an international conference on volcano prediction. 

The disaster was the second in the past year to claim the lives of vulcanologists. Last June, 38 people died when Mount Unzen in Japan erupted. They included the French couple, Maurice and Katia Krafft, who had for years enjoyed tweaking the dragon's tail, venturing close to the edge of volcanoes to take a series of sensational photographs. Harry Glicken, an American vulcanologist, also died on Unzen. 

Why do they do it? Dr John Murray, a colleague of Professor Brown at the OU, admits that it is the sheer power and excitement of volcanoes that first captures the imagination. ``That's what starts you off,'' he says. ``But once you do get into an accident, you follow a very strict procedure.'' 

In 1986, Dr Murray was caught in the middle of a big explosion on Mount Etna. ``By that time, I had been working on Etna for 17 years and I really thought I knew it.'' He was watching a routine eruption, with chunks of material a metre across and weighing a quarter of a tonne emerging and falling short of the geologists. Suddenly the eruption raised its tempo, and they found themselves in the midst of a hail of boulders. ``In that situation, you don't run,'' he says. ``You try to find a flat place, and dodge the bombs as they are coming in. That's fine so long as their trajectory is flat, but if they are coming in from a great height it gets a lot harder.'' 

If Etna could spring a surprise such as that, the much less-studied Galeras posed a far greater risk. Professor Brown was on the mountain to demonstrate a technique he had developed with a colleague at the OU, Dr Hazel Rymer, for predicting eruptions by measuring the gravitational field inside volcanoes. Galeras is one of about a dozen volcanoes around the world that have been chosen for detailed monitoring in a ten-year programme sponsored by the United Nations. 

The scientists were making a recce, to demonstrate their equipment. There seemed little danger; although Galeras has been active since 1990, its most recent eruption was last July. By an awful irony, the trip had been shifted from another day, when a visit would have been quite safe. 

Other scientists were there to measure the gases emerging from the vent holes in the crater. Dr Andrew McFarlane, of Florida International University, standing on the rim, remembers peering into the crater and seeing a Russian scientist, whom he identified as Igor Menyailov, sitting on a rock smoking a cigarette, obviously pleased with the gas samples he had been able to collect. 

Suddenly there was a massive explosion, hurling a column of ash and lava more than a mile into the air. ``I heard this huge boom, and then blazing rocks the size of televisions started falling around us,'' Dr McFarlane said from his hospital bed in the nearby town of Pasto. ``The rocks began to get smaller, then a muddy rain started, bringing down the ashes. Everything was slippery.'' Scrambling back from the brink, he suffered a broken foot, bruises on his legs and badly burnt hands from climbing over the burning rocks. One Ecuadorian scientist, he swears, ran away despite having broken both legs. 

A few hours later, a Colombian telelvision crew took pictures of three men lying on a ledge inside the crater, apparently dead. Later the bodies disappeared, swallowed up by the volcano which had so abruptly ended their lives. Dr McFarlane believes there was no hope of survival for those inside the crater, including Professor Brown, when Galeras blew. 

Another British scientist at the conference, Peter Baxter of Cambridge University, reports that Professor Brown complained to others on Galeras that his gravity meter was not working, which may provide a hint of conditions immediately before the eruption. 

The instrument is a highly sensitive device designed to measure the small changes in gravity caused by the motions of the magma (molten rock) inside the volcano. As the magma rises, gravity increases perceptibly because it has a greater density than the ash and broken rocks closer to the surface. But to detect this effect, the meters need to be sensitive enough to subtract from the equation the effects of the almost-imperceptible swelling of the mountain, which makes it taller, and hence reduces the force of gravity. According to Dr Murray, Professor Brown's device was so sensitive that it could detect an increase in height of less than ten centimetres. 

The UN programme will go on. Dr Murray estimates that there are 15 capital cities in the world in a position to be wiped out or seriously damaged by volcanoes, so better predictions are vital if lives are to be saved. The scientists, drawn by the fascination and the primeval power of the volcanoes, will continue to take risks. 

Mr Krafft once said: ``Most vulcanologists die in their beds, but there are exceptions...'' Tragically, both he and Professor Brown have given their lives to prove the veracity of that remark. 

*
16 January 1993 p.5

British scientist dies in Colombian volcano eruption 

Geoffrey Brown

By James Adams and Ian Murray

A LEADING British scientist was among nine people killed when a volcano in Colombia erupted as they were walking along the inner rim of the crater. Geoffrey Brown, 47, a vulcanologist, was leading a small group studying how to monitor gases on the peak of the 14,109ft Galeras volcano when it spewed out a huge column of glowing rocks, ash and steam nearly two miles high. 

Luis Lemains, an Ecuadorean vulcanologist who was injured in the eruption on Thursday afternoon, said: ``The ground suddenly began shaking and it began to rain burning rock and ashes.'' Reports said that screams could be heard from the crater after the eruption. 

Andrew McFarlane, of Florida International University, said: ``Some of those with us didn't make it out of the crater. There was no way to stop the rocks falling. We just ran. I guess we were lucky.'' 

Television later showed three bodies on a ledge deep inside it. The British embassy in Bogota said last night that six bodies were recovered before bad weather forced a halt to the search early this morning. 

Six Colombians and a Russian were among those believed killed. All had been taking part in a study of a dozen volcanoes around the world, sponsored by the United Nations. 

More than 100 scientists from 50 countries, including another British scientist, Dr Peter Baxter of Cambridge, were attending the conference at Pasto, 13 miles from the volcano, which is 375 miles southwest of Bogota. Dr Baxter, an expert in the respiratory effects of volcano gases, did not join the party going to the crater and telephoned his family yesterday to say that he was safe. 

Galeras, one of 14 active volcanoes in Colombia, erupted on July 6 last year after being dormant for three years. It has been nicknamed ``volcano of the decade'' because of its recent activity, and local residents have been given a yellow alert, warning them to be ready to leave in case there is another eruption in the next few hours. One of the Colombian scientist who died gave an interview only hours before, saying that he believed an eruption was imminent. 

Professor Brown had taken the group to the crater to demonstrate equipment for microgravity monitoring of gases. He had a worldwide reputation for his work in showing how to detect changes in the sub-surface density of gases, which made his study group particularly popular among the other vulcanologists. 

A graduate of Manchester university, he joined the Open University in 1978 as a tutor in earth sciences and, since 1989, has been head of the research and science committee there. He left for Colombia on January 5 by way of Nicaragua and Costa Rica, and had been in Pasto only a few days. 

His wife, Dr Evelyn Brown, is a science tutor with the Open University in Nottingham. She was given the news of her husband's death yesterday. The couple have three grown-up daughters. 

Dr Chris Wilson, Professor Brown's deputy at the university, said that he was a prolific and gifted teacher who fascinated people in the development of research. 

``As chairman of the university's research committee, his impartiality and wisdom gained him wide respect.'' 

*
01 September 1992 p.3

Wet August fails to relieve drought

By Julia Hartley-Brewer and William Burroughs



THIS August has been the wettest for four years but figures from the Meteorological Office show that England and Wales had only 81 per cent of normal rainfall for the three months of summer. 

Despite appearances, most of the country had above-average sunshine in August, with temperatures remaining close to normal. 

August's rain, however, has done little to top up water reserves. Chris Lakeland, a London Weather Centre forecaster, said: ``We don't need damp summers. We need wet winters to replenish the water table. The last three winters have been very dry with less than half the normal rainfall over the country.'' 

The reason for last month's erratic weather lies in the low-pressure system over the country, ferried across the Atlantic by the jet stream. 

Evidence of changes to come could be viewed last autumn and winter in the form of spectacular sunsets that were not the normal reds and golds associated with the setting sun and the delight of shepherds. Instead, about half an hour after the sun had slipped below the horizon, high in the sky a bursting array of violet and purple hues could be seen descending into the deepest crimsons close to the horizon. 

Those sunsets can be attributed to the volcanic eruption of Pinatubo in the Philippines in June last year. It injected more dust and sulphuric acid into the upper atmosphere than any volcano since Krakatoa in 1881. 

Within a few months a dust veil was spreading through the stratosphere that could have a significant cooling effect on the global climate for several years, meteorologists say. 

Evidence of past great eruptions shows that large volcanoes are followed by miserable summers in Britain. Benjamin Franklin observed that the cold winter in Paris back in 1783 and the subsequent poor summer were linked to the huge eruption of Laki in Iceland that year. Krakatoa was followed by cold wet summers throughout Europe. 

The ``year without summer'' of 1816 brought June frosts to New England, widespread food shortages in Europe and the latest wine harvest in France for five centuries. The cause of the poor weather was the eruption of Tambora in Indonesia the year before. 

*
30 August 1992 p.5/10
	
Paradise blossoms in a volcanic valley 

Southern Italy; Gardening

Graham Rose



SOME time before 2000BC, a violent eruption at the north end of the bay of Naples spewed forth the volcano Epomeo, creating the island of Ischia. 

Thirteen centuries later, the volcano grumbled into life again. During the ensuing violence, a great tongue of larva was decanted from a secondary crater to form a rocky ridge extending into the promontory that today terminates in Punta Caruso. 

During this second terrestrial spectacular, the cladding of soil and vegetation that had built up on the skirt of the volcano during the previous millennium was dislodged and tumbled into the gully between the new larva stream and a ridge to the west. This left a narrow valley with a thick bed of rich, dark and highly fertile soil studded with large boulders. 

The next important eruption on Ischia left a gentle green crater and resulted from the decision of the late Sir William Walton, the composer, and his wife Susana in 1956 to buy part of the rich valley bottom and the cliff-like hillside near Forio to make a home and garden. When they bought the site, the valley contained some relict fruit trees being strangled by long-abandoned vines emerging from a mat of scrub overhung with Spanish chestnut trees, which used to dominate the island. A thick stubble of self-seeded evergreen and deciduous oaks clung to crevices in the larval hillside, with shrubs at their feet, including a large number of the pungent myrtle that give the property, La Mortella, its name. 

By the time Walton died in 1983, he and his wife, with some help and advice from the great English landscape architect Russell Page, had made one of the finest gardens in the Naples region. Gardeners travelling in southern Italy would be foolish to ignore it. 

Since her husband's death, Lady Walton has continued to tend and develop the paradise as a memorial to him and a foyer for the charitable foundation she created in his name to provide facilities for master classes for young musicians of proven talent. 

The Waltons used the fertile valley bottom to grow an outstanding collection of Mediterranean and southern hemisphere plants, particularly those from Lady Walton's native South America. Among them are fine examples of fragrant large-belled daturas, aloes, cycads, palms, phormiums, mammoth strelitzias, cordylines, yuccas and gingers, with such tender beauties as high-rise echiums, agapanthus, several forms of cistus and geranium and climbers, including bougainvillea and scrambling plumbagos, to add telling splashes of colour. These are overhung by palms of many types, 11 species of magnolia, tall jacaranda trees and splendid tulip trees, which the Waltons planted to replace the Spanish chestnuts which died of a disease that swept through southern Italy. 

The valley is bisected by a rill linking small basins and fed from a large pond in which water lilies, papyrus and lotus flourish and somnolent carp cruise effortlessly, ignoring the terrapins that munch the lily leaves if Lady Walton forgets to leave them some broken biscuit at the pond edge. In a shady area beyond the water is a serious collection of camellias and, in full view of the high terrace on which Walton's study was sited, a collection of tree ferns he sent back from New Zealand. 

A series of steps and ramps leads to the top of the cliff with its classical postcard view of Vesuvius. Here Lady Walton is creating a large new garden to conserve and display the native plants of Ischia. 

Despite its warm-climate character, the garden at La Mortella is packed with ideas that could easily be adopted by British gardeners. It is open from 9am to 7pm on Tuesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays from Easter until the end of October (entrance about Pounds 4). 

Lady Walton will be performing Facade poems by Edith Sitwell and music by her husband with Richard Baker at the Spa Grand Hall, Scarborough, on Thursday evening (0723 376 774 for bookings), and John Nettles will join them to recite Shakespeare's Henry V Agincourt speech to Walton's music when they repeat the performance at Queen Elizabeth Hall on the South Bank in London on Sunday evening. Early arrivals will be able to chat to Lady Walton as she sells signed editions of her book, Behind the Facade, to raise funds for the Walton Foundation. It contains much about the making of the garden at La Mortella. 

*
12 August 1992 p.8

Volcano erupts. 

Mount Pinatubo volcano; Philippines



Manila: The Mount Pinatubo volcano in north Philippines has begun its second eruption in 14 months, scientists said. The government has alerted rescue units for an evacuation of 70,000 people in danger. 

*
15 April 1992 p.12

Slippery slopes

Philip Howard



What sort of people live on the slopes of an active volcano? The same sort who make their homes beside Chernobyl and the Saint Andreas Fault. Ordinary people who have nowhere else to go, and who reckon that statistically they are more likely to die in a traffic accident (or in California and Sicily by a gun) tha by a natural disaster. Some of these hazardous spots on the surface of the Earth are very attractive. The lower slopes of Etna are rich in vineyards, olive groves and orchards. The volcanic soil is so fertile that it often yields five harvests a year. For ten years it can be a Sicilian paradise in the shadow of its peak. 

And then the mountain grows sick again. Yesterday the river of lava from Etna engulfed the first houses, after breaching the last barrier thrown up to protect the village of Zafferana on the eastern slope down to the sea. The owner watched his house destroyed, having set a table with a bottle of red wine at his front door to welcome the lava. If in a thousand years time archaeologists dig up his house again, they will find social history preserved in amber, though not as dramatically as the remains at Pompeii and Herculaneum, where the eruption of Vesuvius in AD79 buried the towns 20ft deep in less than 48 hours. 

Our modern Sicilian icons of both the true Madonna and Madonna the chanteuse will be as confusing to our descendants as the business transactions recorded in the wax tablets of Lucius Caecilius Jucundus, a jocund name for the bank manager of Pompeii. The local football side of Catania may achieve a fame it never managed in its playing days, as the second-division provincial gladiators of Pompeii have done. Because this is a comparatively small eruption, its aftermath is unlikely to change the European imagination, as Pompeii did by inspiring the neoclassic style, and influencing artists as diverse as Piranesi and the Adams brothers. Josiah Wedgwood changed the pattern of his pottery, and renamed his factory ``Etruria'', under the misapprehension that Pompeii was Etruscan. I do not suppose we are going to get a wave of primitive Zafferana pottery in the year 3000, faithfully copied from the local tourist trash shop. 

Etna was the senior and more famous volcano in antiquity. Its name comes from the Greek verb ``to burn'', just as the noun volcano comes from Vulcan, the Roman counterpart of the Greek god Hephaestus. He was the god of metallurgy, also known as Mulciber ``the Softener'', and was said to have his forge under Etna, where with the Cyclops he forged thunderbolts for Jupiter. 

Apart from Pompeii, Etna has had more frequent and more violent eruptions than Vesuvius. Pindar and Aeschylus refer to the eruption of 475BC. In 396BC, a well-timed eruption by Etna prevented the Carthaginian army from reaching Catania. The most violent historical eruption was in AD1669 along a fissure which opened above the town of Nicolosi, about ten miles south of the path of the present lava flow. The lava then destroyed a dozen villages on the southern slope of Etna, and submerged the western part of the town of Catania. This was the first occasion on which men tried to divert a lava flow, with as little success as they are having so far three centuries later. At first the trench-digging worked. But 500 heavily armed men from a neighbouring village, who feared that the diverted lava stream might descend on them, prevented further work. 

This is the 14th major eruption of Etna this century. So far there have been no deaths, and not much devastation. The owner of the first house to go under the lava yesterday had painted ``Thank you, government'' sarcastically on his wall. Nothing yet has happened as memorable as the death of the philosopher Empedocles, who, having resolved that all matter was made of permutations of the elements of earth, air, fire and water, threw himself into the fiery furnace of Etna. Academic rivals sneered that he wanted people to think that he was a god who had vanished off the face of the Earth. But the volcano foiled him, by spewing out one of his sandals, and demonstrating that he had died by his element of fire. Exaggerated no doubt, as stories in the contemporary tabloids were. But I still should not want to live on the lovely slopes of Etna. It is a grumpy old mountain. 

*
14 April 1992 p.10

Concrete slas and explosives used to stem Etna's lava flow 

Italy

Paul Bompard



THE Italian Army, using explosive charges and United States Marine Corps helicopters to drop large blocks of concrete, will today try to halt the remorseless flow of incandescent lava about to invade the town of Zafferana in the foothills of Mount Etna. 

Yesterday, first experiments with explosives and two-and-a-half tonne cement blocks to at least slow the lava were described as ``encouraging'', but did little to affect a rising front of laa which was only held at bay from the houses of Zafferana by an earthwork barrier. There had been guarded optimism among the civil protection authorities that yesterday's operation might have slowed the lava sufficiently to make it gradually solidify rather than to continue to flow on down. 

Acording to Franco Barberi, a vulcanologist, ``the lava will reach the top of the barrier and overflow within the next day or two. Then the people of Zafferana will have to decide where to channel it, which orchards or houses to sacrifice in order to save the main part of the town''. 

The lava has already singed the first houses in Zafferana and its townspeople were yesterday quarrelling bitterly over whether to simply let it follow its natural path once it goes over the top of the earthwork barrier, or to turn it in another direction. 

In either case damage to at least some of the houses appears inevitable, and 150 army lorries were standing by in case an emergency evacuation should become necessary. While the men of Zafferana argud, the women prayed before the statue of the Madonna of Providence, housed in a tent-church since 1984, when an earthquake damaged many of the town's buildings including the beautiful Sicilian baroque church in the main square. 

Alfio Leonardi, the mayor, said: ``We have faith in technology, but we also have faith in the madonna.'' He was expressing a fatalism and a lack of trust in national institutions, typical of Italians. 

In the Hotel Airone, the nerve centre of the civil protection effort, soldiers, police, Red Cross, forestry guards, firemen and civil protection personnel milled around in an impressive array of uniforms and muttered feverishly into portable telephones. One Italian Navy commando officer was even wearing a bone-handled dagger stuck in his perfectly polished boot. 

The US Navy's Sea Stallion helicopters had yesterday perfectly plced four concrete blocks into the channels of lava. The blocks, taken from the nearby Nato base of Sigonella, were originally intended to be anti-attack barriers. Afterwards the civil protection authorities began searching all over Sicily for even bigger blocks, up to the seven-tonne maximum which each Sea Stallion can comfortably carry. 

Signor Barberi said the first results were promising, but ``we will have to persevere with the explosions to obtain real results. One thing is certain, if we do not relieve the pressure above, it will be impossible to stop the lava advancing below''. 

The eruption, which has continued since January with varying intensity, originates from an opening at about 6,200 feet on the side of 12,200ft Mount Etna, Europe's most active and potentially dangerous volcano. Zafferana stans at only 150 feet up, within just a few miles of the sea. 

In 1792, exactly 200 years ago, the town was partly engulfed by a lava flow. The villagers brought out the statue of the madonna and placed it facing the lava. Steadily the lava advanced, burnt one foot of the madonna and then halted. Today a shrine marks that spot, but if history should repeat itself most of the Zafferana of today would be destroyed. 

*
13 April 1992 p.9

Weather delays attempts to halt Etna's lava flow.

Paul Bompard and John Phillips

WHITE-HOT lava in a 100-yard-wide tide continued to creep steadily down the slopes of Sicily's Mount Etna towards the foothills town of Zafferana yesterday. 

American Navy helicopters were being forced to wait for low cloud to clear before attempting to lower huge concrete blocks into the path of the lava. At the same time commando units of the Italian Navy prepared to use explosives to close off the main channel to allow the lava to spread and solidify. 

By yesterday afternoon the first houses on the outskirts of the town were already surrounded by the glowing, treacle-like lava. There was widespread fear that the eruption might be impossible to contain, and that a partial destruction of Zafferana might be unavoidable. The ava was advancing several dozen yards every hour. 

On Saturday the Italian cabinet declared a state of emergency, thus allowing the civil protection ministry to take any steps it considers necessary to save Zafferana. The few houses closest to the lava front were evacuated at the weekend, and 150 army lorries were standing by to take away more evacuees if the situation takes a sudden turn for the worst. 

``We do not know if the blocks of concrete and the explosives will work,'' Professor Franco Barberi, the civil protection vulcanologist, said. ``It has never been done before in this kind of situation, but we have to try everything possible.'' 

The US navy's four Chinook helicopters, larger than any used by the Italians, were flown to the nearby Nato base of Sigonella on Saturday from an aircraft carrier in the Mediterranean. Their job, weather permitting, will be to place two-ton blocks of concrete in one of the main channels high on the mountain above Zafferana. 

``If the lava can be slowed down,'' Ferdinando Villari, another vulcanologist, said, ``it will spread out, cool and solidify and hold up the new flow of lava coming from the volcano.'' 

The Italian commandos, in a different approach, were preparing to use special explosive charges to blast a tunnel through which the lava passes further down the mountain, thus further slowing up the flow. Helicopters from the Italian naval base at La Spezia have dropped three explosives experts and a vulcanologist about 5,100ft up the 10,902ft volcano. 

But the bad weather prevented them from immediately placing a ton of explosives designed to blast through rock and channel the lava away from the village. Close to the nearest houses in the village, many of them only recently built, soldiers and civil defence workers using bulldozers battled to throw up two 80 yard-wide ramparts of earth and rock as a last line of defence. 

Angry residents accused the government in Rome of being too interested in the general election earlier this month to take adequate measures against the eruption, which began in December. ``I told the politicians two weeks ago that the situation was dangerous, but nobody listened,'' Giuseppe Fichera, who owns a vineyard on the slopes of the volcano, said. ``Only after the outcome of the vote did everyone, including the so-called experts, finally understand the emergency.'' 

Environmental groups are encouraging the authorities to use explosives to divert the flow rather than earth movers and bulldozers. They fear that machines will churn up the topsoil and possibly damage the ecological balance on Mount Etna. In January a dam was built to divert the lava flow from Zafferana into a natural crater, but this reached capacity several days ago. 

Nicola Capria, the civil protection minister, made clear that almost everything being done or considered was experimental. ``We hope they will work. A general evacuation of Zafferana is not yet necessary and we hope it never will be. But we are ready, just in case,'' the minister said. 

But, late yesterday, the white-hot tide was still creeping steadily towards the main part of Zafferana, burning olive groves and vineyards in its path. As it advanced, the townspeople appeared to place more faith in the mercy of the Almighty tan in the ambitious engineering plans of the authorities. 

Many of them gathered in the Church of St Mary of Providence yesterday to pray that the bubbling anger of MounEurope's highest and only constantly active volcano, might be tempered. On Friday the statue of St Mary was taken up a path towards the lava. 

*
29 January 1992 p.9

Pinatubo sunsets `put ozone at risk'

Modern Times

By Nigel Hawkes, Science Editor



THE eruption of Mount Pinatubo in the Philippines in June is creating brilliant sunsets around the world, but atmospheric scientists fear that the particles causing the deep violet skies are also damaging the ozone layer. 

Yesterday, Guy Brasseur, director of the atmospheric chemistry division at the atmospheric research centre in Boulder, Colorado, said that the aerosols responsible for the sunsets might wipe out as much as a tenth of the ozone layer and temperatures for the next two years. 

Dr Brasseur said that he was especially concerned about the effect this spring. Every fall of 1 per cent in ozone leads to a 2 per cent increase in ultra-violet radiation reaching the earth from the sun, increasing dangers of skin cancer. He said that the ozone will recover, but the effect might last about a year or two. 

At the University College of Wales in Aberystwyth, physicists using laser beams to study the upper atmosphere have detected material that they believe is Pinatubo debris. Professor Lance Thomas says that the observations so far are insufficient to identify the material, but suggest that it contains ash or dust as well as the tiny sulphate particles that have the greatest ffect on the weather. 

The Pinatubo eruption, which began on 9 June, produced huge amounts of sulphur dioxide and hydrogen sulphide gas, which condensed at high altitudes into a mist that has gradually spread around the world. 

Professor Thomas is in no doubt that recent sunsets in Britain have owed something to Pinatubo. According to David Parker, of the Meteorological Office, the time to look is half an hour after sunset, when a purple glow in the sky in the direction in which the sun set indicates debris from the volcano. The effect is at its peak this month. 

*
30 March 1993 p.33

Not quite all the way to hell.

Television

Nigel Hawkes


Horizon, BBC2 

In the global ozone balance, how much hath God wrought, and how much mankind? Nobody but the occasional eccentric now denies that the production of chlorine chemicals for use in refrigerators and insulators has had a serious effect on the levels of ozone in the stratosphere. But is this manmade effect significant when compared with the spectactular pyrotechnics of volcanoes? 

Last night's Horizon set out to find the answer with the aid of an eight-legged robot called Dante, designed in Pittsburg to be lowered down the crater of Mount Erebus, a volcano in Antarctica that lies within the area encompassed by the ozone hole. Dante was designed in a bit of a rush to descend into the inferno of Erebus, the Greek for hell. Originally, by a fine literary conceit, all too rare among scientific projects, Dante was designed to be controlled by a second robot on the surface called Virgil, but appears to have been heaved over the edge by several strong men. 

The inside of volcanic craters is no place for the nervous. A previous expedition to Erebus in 1978 ended in near disaster when a vulcanologist lowered down on a rope was bombarded with red hot lumps of lava and was quickly hauled up again. Since then, nobody has risked a second try. Yet only observations at the very lava's edge, down where the magma boils and bubbles, can really tell us what the gases are that emerge from volcanoes into the atmosphere. Hence the robot Dante, built with money from the United States' space agency Nasa, which hopes that experience inside volcanoes may one day come in useful on Mars. 

The mission was of more than academic interest. Cancers of the skin such as malignant melanoma and squamous cell carcinoma are rising alarmingly, especially in Australia and New Zealand, two countries populated by white-skinned settlers from greyer climes. So far, all of this increase can be attributed to the taste for sunbathing, and none to increased levels of ultraviolet radiation caused by ozone depletion. The ozone hole is too recent to have contributed anything much. But future prospects are alarming, unless ozone-depleting chemicals are quickly brought under control. 

After setting the scene so admirably, it has to be said that Horizon was let down by technology. Barely 20 feet into the crater, Dante developed a kink in its umbilical cord and stopped sending useful information back. Hauled out almost as ignominiously as its live predecessor, the robot left all the interesting questions unanswered. 

The film prompted a few reflections. For years, environmentalists have been arguing that the production of hundreds of new chemicals every year is a form of Russian roulette, with the global environment as the potential victim. So far, though, the earth has mostly had the last laugh, turning out to have a multitude of ways of rendering harmless almost everything the chemical industry can throw at it. The chlorine chemicals, superficially the most benign of products, barely capable of hurting a fly, have proved the major exception. 

The lesson, I suppose, is the familiar one about the price of security being eternal vigilance. While the biosphere is tougher than some have feared, like all systems it has its unexpected weaknesses. As Dante proved, an organism representing the finest in robot technology can be found out by a kink in its umbilical. Not by great things but by small will the earth perish. 

*
30 December 1992 p.4

Volcano tests a robot bound for Mars

By Nigel Hawkes, Science Editor



PERCHED on the edge of a volcano 800 miles from the South Pole, an eight-legged robot is being made ready for a journey into the underworld. 

Within the next few days, the Pounds 1.3 million robot, called Dante, will clamber into the crater of Mount Erebus, a 12,447ft mountain on Ross Island in Antarctica. Braving temperatures of 1,100 Fahrenheit, it will collect the first samples of gases direct from a volcano's vents and send live television pictures to the Goddard space flight centre run by Nasa in Greenbelt, Maryland. 

Yesterday, the 12-man expedition had established camp near the edge of the crater and was readying Dante for the descent, which could begin today. As well as learning more about conditions inside the crater, the project is a test run for robots that will one day explore Mars. 

David Lavery, manager of Nasa's telerobotics programme, said: ``The Erebus project lets us test a rover in the most Mars-like place on Earth while giving us the payoff of using it to obtain unique scientific information.'' 

Dante, named after the author of the Divina Commedia which describes a trip to hell, has been built in a rush so that an attempt can be made on Erebus before the Antarctic summer ends. The robot stands more than 8ft tall and has been designed and built at Carnegie-Mellon University in Pittsburgh. 

A dozen electric motors operate its spider-like legs and give it a maximum speed of around 6ft a minute. Information and pictures will be sent through an umbilical cord to the crater rim, and then by satellite to Goddard. 

Erebus was chosen because it is one of only three volcanoes in the world with a permanent lava lake inside its crater. Dante will be lowered 850ft to the edge of the lake and will take temperature readings, measure gas compositions and retrieve gas samples from volcanic vents. The gases, lava and flying rocks hurled from the depths make the crater far too dangerous for human exploration. 

While in the crater, Dante will have to navigate cliffs, overhangs, soft ash beds and other difficult terrain. Its designer, Dr William Whittaker of Carnegie Mellon, said: ``It's as bad as it gets.'' 

A gas chromatograph carried by Dante will be used to sample gases as they emerge from volcanic vents, known as fumaroles. The composition of these gases should provide information about the source of the magma supplying the volcano. 

Vulcanologists suspect that they will contain a high proportion of carbon dioxide, a theory it is impossible to test from a safe position on the crater's rim. Dante should also gather samples of a powdery material that surrounds the fumaroles. This is thought to contain gold, copper and zinc which have condensed from the hot gases. 

Conditions will be tough even for a robot, with superheated steam and clouds of acid. The idea, says Nasa, is to test technology in an extremely harsh environment. 

ICI
*
05 December 1995,p.12

Rumbles raise fear of Fuji eruption / Overseas news 

Mount Fuji, Japan

From Peregrine Hodson in Tokyo



MOUNT FUJI, one of the most evocative symbols of Japan, may be building towards a big volcanic eruption, scientists say. 

A research institute in Tsukuba, northeast of Tokyo, noticed preliminary signs on October 1, when a seismometer registered an earthquake measuring 2.0 on the Richter scale, ten miles undergound, just north of Mount Fuji. 

The seismometer showed the oscillations of a low-frequency earthquake about once or twice a second which is a sign of subterranean magma flows. According to seismologists, the Tokai region near Mount Fuji could be shaken by an earthquake at any time. If so, it could trigger a volcanic eruption. 

Japan is formed by the intersection of four tectonic plates, which cause the country's frequent earthquake and volcanic activity. Despite its symmetrical appearance, the sacred mountain is a composite of three separate volcanoes, and achieved its conical shape comparatively recently. 

Some historians believe that the carefully raked mounds of sand in Zen gardens commemorate the formation of Mount Fuji, which happened in recorded history. The volcano has erupted every 300 or 400 years. 


*
22 October 1995, p.3/18

Luxury, despite the volcano / Features 

Property

Mary Wilson



MONTSERRAT has been in the news a lot recently because of its volcano which was threatening to erupt at any time. 

This, however, has not perturbed the Isles Bay Plantation company, which is building large Caribbean-style houses on the northern side of the island, 3.5 miles from Chance's Peak, the volcano that began rumbling in August. Scientists predicted that a full eruption was imminent but later changed their minds. John Renton, of the Renton Welch Partnership, which has designed the properties, said: ``It has not deterred people from coming to the island to see what is happening. One family who recently bought one of our houses has just arrived for a long holiday with no worries. 

``We had a survey done some time ago which confirmed that we would never be troubled, even if the volcano did erupt. Part of Montserrat's charm is that it is a volcanic island and people have to take that in their stride.'' 

Isles Bay has sold 10 houses and hopes to build another 12. The one-storey villas have verandas, sun decks and 40ft swimming pools. Prices range from about Pounds 300,000 to Pounds 550,000. The island is mountainous with lush vegetation, low humidity and an average temperature of 80F all year. 

*
27 September 1995,p.12

Eruption `may have nuclear test link' / Overseas news 

New Zealand; Nuclear tests in the Pacific



THE European Parliament, furious about recent French nuclear tests in the South Pacific, plans to examine possible links between the blasts and a volcanic eruption more than 3,000 miles away in New Zealand. 

``It may well be just a coincidence, but we need to investigate,'' Kenneth Collins, a British Labour Member of the Parliament, said yesterday. Some members of the Parliament suspect that the French underground tests on Mururoa atoll may have sent shockwaves along underwater fault lines and caused the eruption of Mount Ruapehu in New Zealand's North Island. Mr Collins, who will chair a parliamentary hearing on the issue next month, said there was so far no evidence linking the tests with the volcano. He added, however, that the blasts might be related not only to the New Zealand eruption but also to sharply increased seismic activity recently in Indonesia. 

Mount Ruapehu continued to rumble yesterday, but scientists rated seismic activity as considerably less than during the previous three days. Heavy cloud shrouded the 9,200ft mountain throughout the day, but mudflows, volcanic ash and sulphurous gases reminded surrounding communities that the threat was far from over. 

The alert level stayed at four on a scale of one to five and an air-exclusion zone remained in force. Some families were also continuing to leave the area. 


*
26 September 1995, p.1

Volcano emergency alert / Home news 

Mount Ruapehu, New Zealand

Michael Munro



BOULDERS, mud, ash and poisonous gases are hurled thousands of feet in the air as an eruption of Mount Ruapehu in New Zealand's North Island gained in intensity yesterday. 

The effects were being experienced over a wide area with airports having to close in Napier and Gisborne, 90 miles to the east, and ash falling on high voltage lines causing power surges as far away as Wellington, 150 miles to the south. 

The families of some army staff at the Waiouru military camp, southeast of the 9,000ft mountain, were evacuated yesterday and a hotel at a popular tourist resort was forced to shut its doors. 

A high-altitude section of the Auckland-Wellington ``Desert Road'' was closed after ash and toxic fumes made driving hazardous. In Ohakune, a service town for Mount Ruapehu's ski fields, there were reports of a run on essential supplies as residents prepared for possible disruption to transport services. On Sunday scientists had predicted that a large explosion, eclipsing the 1945 eruption that created a lava dome on the summit and ash falls in Wellington, was imminent. 

The mountain erupted throughout yesterday and emergency services remained on 24-hour alert. It then fell quiet although there were signs that activity might resume today. 


*
11 September 1995, p.16

Past blast / Features 

Science Briefing; Mind and Matter

Nigel Hawkes



THE greatest destruction of species the Earth has ever witnessed seems almost certain to have been caused by a huge volcanic eruption. The loss of species 250 million years ago, at the boundary of the Permian and Triassic periods, was the most dramatic event the Earth has witnessed since life emerged. As many as 90 per cent of marine species and 70 per cent of terrestrial vertebrates died out. 

A volcano has long been the favoured culprit for the Permian-Triassic extinction, but new evidence on the precise timing of the event makes it virtually certain. 

Paul Renne of the Berkeley Geochronology Centre in California and colleagues report in Science that they have used argon dating on rocks from southern China to date the boundary to 249.98 million years ago, give or take 200,000 years. This was within a few hundred thousand years of the best dates for a huge outpouring of lava from volcanoes in what is now Siberia. 

In the course of about one million years, the eruption threw out between two and three million cubic kilometres of lava. The result would have been abrupt global cooling caused by sulphates hurled into the atmosphere. The ice caps expanded, the sea levels dropped, and species after species succumbed. The Earth may even have rocked on its axis, causing further climatic disruption. 

Cause and effect cannot be proved in this case, but the very close coincidence in time between the two events makes it seem highly likely. 

*
29 August 1995 p.10

Mirrors to provide clue to volcano's moods / Overseas news 

Montserrat

Tom Rhodes in Plymouth, Montserrat



THE eerie silence under the volcano was punctured only by the sound of tramping boots through ash-covered undergrowth as Royal Marines and scientists climbed the steep incline leading to Chances Peak yesterday. 

For more than a month the hostile Soufriere Hills crater in the mountain above has blighted the tiny British colony of Montserrat. But experts and Marines hoped that Operation Harlech, yesterday's mission to secure reflective mirrors on the crater's outer wall, might explain whether the volcano would continue merely to belch malevolently or engulf this Caribbean island in an eruption. 

The precarious and muddy climb through dense shrubbery, trumpet trees and dasheen jungle rhubarb led past a ravine, snaking up to the smoking vents above, before Lloyd Lynch, a Trinidadian expert in seismic equipment, stopped by a solar panel. Beneath it, a buried generator emitted the critical signal that would activate the needle of a seismograph at the early warning station more than 1,000ft below. 

Mr Lynch jumped up and down, his handset squealing in protest. ``That should put the fear of God into them down there,'' he said. ``If it starts to wail like a police siren, then we are out of here. But by then you should start to see something.'' 

The thick clouds started to lift and a swirl of smoke could be seen spewing from the fissure above Gages Upper Soufriere. The handset began to whine. 

On the hillside, Captain Paul Mansell and Sergeant Kevin Foster, a member of the Marines' elite Mountain and Arctic Warfare Cadre, were struggling in the mist to find the point where they would knock fixtures into the soft rock and secure the mirrors. 

John Shepherd, the British vulcanologist from Lancaster University who had already erected his electronic distance measuring device on a rocky plateau, waited nervously more than half a mile down the hillside. The team of Marines remained invisible and, without sighting them, it would be difficult to operate his box of tricks. 

The instrument, which bounces a laser beam off the small reflectors, can gauge any recent bulges in the volcano's walls and perhaps determine how serious the rumblings will become for a colony that already has been forced to evacuate more than half its 10,000 population from the surrounding southern region. 

*
28 August 1995,p.9

Volcano `will be active for months' / Overseas news 

Montserrat

From Tom Rhodes in Plymouth, Montserrat



THE tiny British colony of Montserrat was swathed in gloom yesterday as scientists predicted that its unstable volcano may remain active for three months, endangering the lives of thousands desperate to return to their homes in the south of the island. 

``It is the Doomsday scenario,'' Frank Savage, the Caribbean dependency's British Governor, said. ``We cannot keep people out for that long, but if we let them back in, it will be like playing Russian roulette with people's lives.'' 

Mr Savage and Reuben Meade, the Chief Minister, are hoping that an eruption or a steady decline of its belching emissions finally will silence the Soufriere Hills crater. But as both men attended church services yesterday with ash and smoke continuing to spew from Chances Peak, neither can have been confident that his prayers would be answered. 

More than half of the population of 10,000 has been moved from Plymouth, the capital, and the surrounding southern shores. A further 2,500 with enough money and relations on Caribbean islands have left, but the presence of tropical storm Iris in the seas between Montserrat and Antigua yesterday prevented further departures. 

John Shepherd, a British vulcanologist from Lancaster University flown in the previous day by the Overseas Development Agency, was also prevented from erecting equipment that would gauge any movement at the crater's edge. The Electronic Distance Measuring Device lay idle in his hotel room. 

The volcano has failed to unsettle two British researchers who were trawling the southern coast in search of a fishing bat and a tree bat which they had radio tagged. Matthew Morton, from Bristol, and Dave Edwards, from Grimsby, on an eight-week fellowship with Fauna and Flora International, were determined not to be interrupted in their studies. 

*
27 August 1995, p.1/14

Golf-playing islanders defy volcano threat / Overseas news 

Montserrat

Tony Allen-Mills, Plymouth, Montserrat



BEHIND her the volcano belched malevolently, smothering the hillsides with a brooding grey cloud. Above her head, a clattering Royal Navy helicopter thundered down the valley on a monitoring mission. Over her shoulder, the sea heaved with the early swell of a fast-approaching storm. 

None of it troubled Beverly Harris. Come hell or high water on the Caribbean island of Montserrat and official forecasts indicated both she was going to take a golf lesson. 

After a draining week of mass evacuations, volatile weather and the constant threat of a volcanic eruption, Harris was desperate for relief from the uncertainty and frustration that yesterday was gripping the world's unluckiest island. 

``If only the damned thing would blow, everyone could get on with their lives,'' said Harris, as she wielded a nine iron. It was a sentiment that echoed across the island yesterday as Chance's Peak in the Soufriere Hills continued to threaten its first big eruption in 20,000 years. 

When the steady advance of the seismic rumblings that have been troubling Montserrat for most of the summer reached crisis point with the evacuation of the capital, Plymouth, last Wednesday, an enterprising shop owner responded with a volcano T-shirt: ``Now she puffs, but will she blow? Trust the Lord and pray it's no''. 

After three days of appalling dislocation, however, many in Montserrat were trusting in the Lord and praying it would be yes if only to end the agony of not knowing when they might return to their homes. 

``Okay, when a hurricane hits, like Hugo did here in 1989, you shelter for 24 hours, it passes by, you spend a year cleaning up and it's over,'' said Father Larry Finnegan, priest at St Martin's church. ``But with this volcano, you get moved out of your home, nothing happens, you go back to your home, you get moved out again.'' 

For Reuben Meade, the island's chief minister, and Captain Paul Mansell, commanding the 70 Royal Marines stationed on Montserrat, the mounting frustration threatens to become even more of a dilemma than the physical challenge of rehousing half the island's 10,000 population. 

Mansell, whose men are running the local power station and manning the roadblocks that encircle Plymouth, praised residents for their co-operation so far. ``But frustration will build,'' he said. ``We can't give them precise information because we are not making decisions based on fact. The scientists just can't tell us when any volcano will explode.'' 

The crisis has already seen off an American medical school and Plymouth has become a ghost town, with businesses such as Peewee's Liquor World and the Double Happiness restaurant forced to close their doors indefinitely. 

Inevitably, most of those who fled Montserrat last week were the more prosperous, whose scramble for airline seats left a sour taste among locals. ``Everyone on my church board has left,'' said Ed Gough, a former American long-distance lorry driver, who works for a local evangelical church. ``Frankly, I'm a little disappointed that those who have been blessed with comparative comfort should forget their sense of responsibility to the island.'' 

At least some on the island are fighting valiantly to lead normal lives, however. Orville Clarke, the Montserrat golf club professional, intends to stay open he regards the occasional shower of volcanic ash as good for his greens. 


*
26 August 1995, p.14

Tropical storms bring new misery to volcano island / Overseas news 

Montserrat

From Tom Rhodes in Plymouth, Montserrat



FROM their early warning station in the foothills of Chances Peak, a handful of Royal Marines gazed skyward in trepidation as the shrouded crater 3,000ft above continued to spew smoke. 

Scientists said the volcano, which has cast a shadow over the tiny British colony of Montserrat for more than a month, was close to a full eruption. Marine Rob Welsh and his colleague would have just two minutes to escape before the capital of Plymouth was engulfed in molten lava and burning ash. 

``There are no signs of sulphur up there at the moment and that means it is getting dangerous,'' said Marine Welsh, from Nottingham. 

The Government last night began urging residents to evacuate the island as violent tropical storms approached from the east, knocking down the tents of those who had already fled from under the shadow of the volcano. 

``We're encouraging people who have families on neighbouring islands to leave,'' said Juliette Brade, National Disaster Co-ordinator, speaking at a school that has been turned into a hospital. 

More than 1,500 people flew out on Wednesday and Thursday on special shuttle flights. Those who stayed are now anxiously following reports on the progress of Hurricane Humberto and Tropical Storm Iris in the Atlantic Ocean. A separate tropical squall hit the island late on Thursday. At a tent city where 700 evacuees were staying, gusty winds wrenched corrugated iron sheeting from shower stalls and the kitchen and sent them flying into the tents. 

A force of 33 Marines from 42 Commando was sent to the eastern Caribbean island at the start of the week when a substantial explosion covered the capital in dust and ash. They were joined yesterday by 40 new arrivals, who have been ordered by the Ministry of Defence to help a small and overworked Montserrat police and defence force to cope with mass evacuation. HMS Southampton, a 42-type destroyer, circled offshore in readiness, as a series of checkpoints kept the south of the colony closed to all residents but those willing to risk swift visits to their shops and farms. 

At one checkpoint was Corporal Jim Oakley, a 30-year-old Marine from Tolpuddle in Dorset, who was sent to inspect the crater just before it erupted last Tuesday. ``We were standing on the ridge when she blew,'' he said. The crater, he added, now contained three wide vents, blowing regular plumes of smoke and ash into the atmosphere. ``There were rocks the size of tenpin bowling balls landing right next to it at about 150mph. I certainly don't want to go up there again.'' 

Surveillance of Chances Peak is now confined to daily ``sniff tests'' carried out by a Royal Navy Lynx helicopter which plays its films on return to an assortment of scientific experts based in the north of the island. 

A diesel generator manned by the Navy and Marines at Plymouth has kept electric power at a maximum, not for the general population of 10,000 but to maintain the delicate monitoring equipment near the edge of Chances Peak and to pick up minute details of any earth tremors. 

Predictions of a major eruption over the weekend ranged from more than 80 per cent to less than 50 per cent. For many, the latest natural disaster represents a further stage in a curse that has plagued the pear-shaped island since it was first settled by Christopher Columbus in 1493. A hurricane in 1928 killed the lime trees before Hurricane Hugo six years ago wrecked the cotton industry. For followers of popular culture, it also left uninhabitable George Martin's famous studios which had brought the likes of the Rolling Stones, Sting and Elton John to these Caribbean shores. Yesterday, the cricket Test televised live from the Oval was welcome relief from the storm and volcano bulletins on local radio stations. 

Tom Dawkins, an expatriate of seven years standing, said the soft-spoken people of Montserrat would not tolerate living under the volcano for long: ``People here are very good at dealing with the aftermath. But they hate the waiting.'' 

*
25 August 1995, p.12

Half of Montserrat evacuated as volcanic explosion grows more likely / Home news 

Nigel Hawkes, Science Editor



SCIENTISTS monitoring the Chances Peak volcano on the island of Montserrat said yesterday that an explosive eruption was becoming increasingly likely. 

Hundreds of people have already left their homes on the Caribbean island and fled to safer areas in the north or neighbouring Antigua. Yesterday Britain sent another 40 Royal Marines to Montserrat to assist the 30 already there with public order. HMS Southampton, a Royal Navy guided missile destroyer, is on standby off the coast, and the ship's doctor, Rory Rickard, has set up a shore-based field hospital. 

Residents have been streaming out of the capital, Plymouth, and into tent cities after authorities evacuated the southern half of the island, which lies in the shadow of Chances Peak. 

The scientists, sampling gases from the volcano, say that the flow has been interrupted, increasing the chances of a big explosion. The volcano has been spewing gas and ash for the past month and is being monitored by experts from the US Geological Survey, the Caribbean Seismic Research Centre in Trinidad, and the French Volcano Observatory in Guadeloupe. It has been quiescent for more than a century, so that predicting the nature of the eruption is difficult. The scientists had been confident that they could give 24 to 36 hours' notice of an eruption, but the slowdown of gas flow in the past few days has disconcerted them. The volcano lies only four miles from Plymouth, which is now a city of empty streets and shuttered windows. 

Yesterday the scientists pointed out that they could no longer be certain of providing even a six-hour warning. ``On the advice of the scientists, we have evacuated quite a large part of the island, roughly half the island, roughly two-thirds of the population,'' Governor Frank Savage said. 

The volcano has a horseshoe-shaped crater about 500ft deep, open on one side and containing a lava dome that rises almost to the rim. The experts have been watching the dome for signs of expansion, which would indicate that the volcano is about to blow. 

An explosion similar to the one that blew apart Mount St Helens in Washington State in 1980 is possible. Volcanoes that erupt infrequently do so in a less predictable way than the regular performers such as the volcanoes of Hawaii. The Hawaiian rocks are permeable when molten, allowing gases to escape and the lava to flow in a predictable way. Where gases become trapped, as at Mount Pinatubo in the Philippines in 1991, and perhaps now in Montserrat, a more violent result is likely. 

Huge volumes of gas and ash can be released and flow downhill at high speeds, killing anybody in their path. Even more destructive are the pyroclastic flows that are sometimes produced by such explosions. Particles of rock and magma are swept along at speeds of several hundred miles per hour in a mass of hot gas. 

It was an eruption of this type that destroyed the city of St Pierre in Martinique in 1902, when Mount Pelee erupted. Almost all the city's 30,000 inhabitants perished. In geological times, even larger explosions have occurred in the region. 

In the case of Chances Peak, the scientists say there is a 70 to 80 per cent chance of a major eruption, and the plan is to evacuate all the island's 10,000 residents when it is judged imminent. So far, they have been ordered only to move out of the southern and eastern sections of the island to the area north of the Belham Valley, four miles from Plymouth. 

*
24 August 1995, p.10

Volcano isle on red alert / Overseas news 

Montserrat



FORTY more Royal Marines are to fly to the Caribbean volcano island of Montserrat, where emergency services were placed on red alert yesterday. 

The Royal Navy's guided missile destroyer HMS Southampton is on standby off the coast of the island, where there is increasing concern over continuing eruptions of Chance's Peak. The extra marines leave today to join comrades from the Plymouth-based 42 Commando already on the island to help with evacuees, traffic management and public order tasks. 

The volcano has erupted three times since Tuesday and experts predict a 70 to 80 per cent chance of a huge eruption. 

*
23 August 1995, p.11

Rumbling volcano forces islanders to leave homes / Overseas news 

HMS Southampton;  Montserrat

Eve-Ann Prentice, Diplomatic Correspondent



MORE than half the population of the Caribbean island of Montserrat have been evacuated, as scientists' fears of a volcanic eruption grew yesterday. 

Six thousand of the 10,000 population have been moved to the north of the British colony, away from the path of ash borne on prevailing easterly winds. Many returned to Plymouth, the capital, during the day, in an attempt to keep businesses open in the face of the threat from the rumbling Chances Peak. The volcano has been throwing up increasing amounts of dust and debris for the past five weeks. 

``This is a weekend volcano,'' Frank Savage, the island's Governor, said. ``At the moment it is behaving itself, but each weekend it runs at a higher and higher level of activity. Now scientists think there is a 60 per cent chance of a full eruption.'' 

The Foreign Office has advised Britons to stay away from the island and only 20 to 30 British holidaymakers are believed to be there in the Caribbean tourism industry's low season. 

Sailors from HMS Southampton were helping to move families to a tent city in the north and the vessel was standing by in case a full evacuation of the island was necessary. Islanders donned surgical masks to counter the effects of ash that spewed on to Plymouth and nearby villages and the Government has made contingency plans for a mass evacuation that would include flying people to nearby Antigua and Guadeloupe. 

``People from the south have moved with good humour and the minimum of fuss,'' Mr Savage said. ``There is a 10pm to 7am curfew in the capital, but people are allowed in to do essential business during the day.'' 

The island's airport which changed its name last week from Blackburne to W. H. Bramble remained open yesterday, although a ceremony to mark the name-change has been abandoned until the volcano alert has passed. The island is an up-market tourist destination and visitors have included members of the Royal Family, musicians such as Mick Jagger and Sting, and international financiers. In the past, Montserrat has also attracted money-launderers. Five years ago there were 347 banks on the seven-by-11-mile island, or one for every 40 people. Many of the dubious ``brass-plate'' banks were closed after investigations by Scotland Yard fraud squad officers and tourism now dominates the economy. 

In 1989 Hurricane Hugo swept across Montserrat. Virtually everything on the island was destroyed and a huge infrastructure plan was launched with substantial aid from Britain. 


*
14 August 1995, p.9

Royal Marines keep watch on restive volcano / Overseas news 

Chances Peak, Montserrat

David Adams in Plymouth, Montserrat



VOLCANIC activity on the tiny eastern Caribbean island of Montserrat increased over the weekend as a detachment of Royal Marines landed in readiness for a possible eruption of Chances Peak. 

The long-dormant volcano that burst back to life last month vented gas and ash as the British forces were settling in for the night in tents at the local cricket ground. A number of earthquakes, one registering 3.5 on the Richter scale, also shook the southern half of the island. 

``It was the strongest cluster of earthquake-type activity we have had,'' said Frank Savage, the island's British Governor. 

A team of scientists monitoring the volcano says an eruption is unlikely. The sleeping giant has not produced a major eruption for centuries, but London is taking no chances. Several thousand residents from the eastern side of the island have been evacuated after a vent appeared in the side of the volcano, spouting sulphurous gas and ash. The Royal Navy frigate HMS Westminster has replaced the Type-12 destroyer HMS Southampton on stand-by, in case an evacuation becomes necessary, and the 30 or so Marines are ashore. 

A British colony since 1783, the verdant, pear-shaped island is one of the smallest inhabited in the Caribbean. It is only 11 miles long and five miles wide, with a population of about 12,000. Mr Savage says the resilient islanders are coping well with the crisis. But after almost four weeks of earthquakes and a spiral of volcanic clouds over Chances Peak, he worries that they may be losing confidence. 

Within 15 hours, between Saturday afternoon and Sunday morning, scientists recorded about 100 very small earthquakes. At least three strong ones awoke residents of Plymouth, the island's main town at the foot of the volcano, early yesterday. 

As a near full moon rose over Montserrat, casting an eerie light over the crater of Chances Peak, which at 3,000 feet dominates Plymouth on its lower slopes, Royal Marines Captain Paul Mansell ordered his men up the volcano to establish an observation post. ``In case the volcano blows, we are here to assist the scientists and local authorities in any way we can,'' he said. The Marines arrived with highly sensitive thermal imaging equipment. 

The scientists believe the volcanic activity is due to tectonic plate movement miles below the surface, pushing magma upwards and forcing water out, creating clouds of steam mixed with sulphurous gases. ``Materials from the North American plate are being forced beneath the smaller Caribbean plate,'' said Dr William Ambeh, a research seismologist leading the team of about ten scientists on the island. They hope that the thermal imaging equipment will help them to detect any heat build-up which could indicate an imminent eruption. 

The people of Montserrat, who have in the past complained of being a forgotten colony, are heartened by the British response. ``It's times like these when I'm glad we're not independent,'' said Midge Kocen, a volunteer manning a public hotline at Plymouth's emergency operations centre. 

*
14 August 1995, p.12

The woman who looks into Hell's mouth / Features 

Mind and Matter

Hugh Aldersey-Williams



Hugh Aldersey-Williams on a scientist who travels the world seeking out the secrets of volcanoes 

Should British tourists interrupt their holidays on the Caribbean island of Montserrat because the 3000ft volcano, Chances Peak, has been spewing ash and sulphurous gases? Last week scientists were predicting a huge eruption, and advising people to leave, now they are not so sure. Every year about 50 volcanoes round the world will erupt. Dr Hazel Rymer of the Open University's Department of Earth Sciences, keeps a close watch on about a dozen volcanoes in five countries Nicaragua, Mexico, Iceland, Costa Rica and Italy. 

Some of these sites, such as Masaya, near Managua in Nicaragua, and Popocatepetl, near Mexico City, threaten large populations. All of them vary greatly both in how often and how violently they might erupt. Askja in Iceland, for example, last erupted in 1961. But its most violent event was in 1875, when a massive explosion formed a huge lake, five kilometres across and one kilometre deep. 

Broadly speaking there are three types of volcano, explains Dr Rymer. There are those where the Earth's plates are moving apart from each other. These tend to be cracks in the ground, rather than the familiar conical mountains, through which ``fire fountains'' spurt. The second type is formed where two of the Earth's plates crash into one another. These are larger, usually conical volcanoes, with very rugged sides because they erupt explosively. Thirdly, there are the volcanoes which appear in the middle of a plate, from a hot spot deep inside the Earth's mantle that bubbles up and burns through the plate. 

There are 40 volcano observatories around the world, where scientists are monitoring geophysical activity as it happens rather than just studying rock samples that tell you about past events. Dr Rymer, 34, holds a Royal Society research fellowship which funds her fieldwork. 

There are many ways of monitoring volcanic activity ranging from the measurement of ground deformation, seismic vibration, thermal imaging, analysis of gases seeping up through the soil of a volcano, to satellite-based radar. Dr Rymer prefers to detect and measure the tiny changes in gravity at ground level which can indicate dramatic changes in mass and density of material underground. 

Poas, in Costa Rica, is a volcano that she has been monitoring for more than ten years. At its summit lay a hellish lake of warm, concentrated sulphuric acid which suddenly evaporated in the late 1980s a clear sign that something was afoot. Her measurements then produced the first unambiguous prediction of an eruption by the microgravity technique. 

Each survey takes her anything between one day and a week, so that she does not have to leave her husband, a mechanical engineer, and two little boys Ben and Sam, for too long. ``I did take Ben up Mount Etna in a Land Rover when he was only six weeks,'' she says. The microgravity technique was developed originally for the oil industry in order to detect underground salt domes that might indicate the presence of oil. ``The instruments are over-designed for that job. You can in fact detect far smaller changes,'' explains Dr Rymer. It is possible to track geophysical events, such as the rise of magma pressure with a ``feeder pipe'' of rock, several kilometres inside a volcano, providing a good indication of the working of a volcano's plumbing system. ``You would expect a volcano to inflate before an eruption, but we have found cases where a change of gravity is the only indication of a coming eruption,'' says Dr Rymer in support of the gravity measurement techniques. 

In practice, the range of tools is what counts. ``The more techniques you have, the more you can refine your models,'' says Dr Rymer. For example, one would normally expect a simple correlation between gravity and elevation: the gravitational pull falls as you move further from the centre of the Earth. But the pre-eruption swelling of a volcano the upward deformation or inflation measured by one type of instrument is often accompanied not by a fall but an increase in gravity as measured by Dr Rymer's microgravity devices. This is because dense magma has flowed into the volcano's core. In other volcanoes, it is not magma but the build-up of gas pressure, and a decrease in density, that presages an eruption. 

On Mount Etna microgravity measurements show that networks of fissures within the volcano can remain open between eruptions. The result is that pressure does not necessarily build up when magma flows in, so staving off eruption. Microgravity monitoring was the only practical way to discover this because the magma fills the fissures without producing significant deformation or seismic activity. 

``There is less worry now about prediction,'' says Dr Rymer. ``Volcanologists know. Pinatubo (in the Philippines) was predicted and thousands of lives were saved.'' She believes the fact that there was a US Air Force base in the vicinity of Mount Pinatubo was instrumental in ensuring that locals were evacuated. By contrast, a relatively minor eruption in Colombia in 1985 resulted in the loss of 22,000 lives. 

Dr Rymer herself was seriously burnt on a trip to Costa Rica in 1986. ``I was in a region of rainforest where boiling mudpools bubble at the base of the volcanoes,'' she recalls. ``I just happened to step on to an area covered with leaves which looked just like rainforest floor. My leg slipped through into the boiling mud.'' She suffered first-degree burns and she had to spend a week in hospital. 

But it did not put her off her work. In particular she loves the spectacular lava flows. ``You can get really close to lava, because it flows past in its own channel. It looks like a steaming red river with black patches where the rock is beginning to cool. Some lava flows are thicker than others, and move really slowly, like caterpillar tracks. But the most incredible thing is the sound it makes like lots of tin cans being kicked around. The last thing you would expect.'' 


*
09 August 1995, p.1

Tourists on alert to flee volcano island / Overseas news 

Montserrat

Tim Jones



BRITISH tourists were preparing last night to join a possible evacuation of the Caribbean holiday island of Montserrat to escape an erupting volcano. 

As the 3,000-ft Chances Peak spewed ash and a thick plume of sulphurous gas, would-be British visitors were advised to cancel their trips. 

Frank Savage, the Governor of the British dependency, said scientists and vulcanologists had promised him between six and 12 hours' warning of a big eruption. 

In that time, he was confident he could move the 12,000 residents of the seven-by-11-mile island to a tented village that is being built in the north. There are only about 150 tourists on the island at the moment, including two dozen Britons, because it is the low season. 

Anthony Burr, a marketing executive from Stroud, Gloucestershire, said: ``There are teams of scientists here and they are all looking very worried. I'm pulling out of here later today as the island is unsafe. Every resident has been told to have bags packed ready for an immediate evacuation.'' 

HMS Westminster, a British frigate, is standing by offshore to act as an emergency command and control centre. An RAF Hercules is flying in tents, food, blankets and emergency supplies from nearby Antigua, and American and Dutch ships are also standing by. 


*
26 June 1995 p.15

Early warning / Features 

Science Briefing; Mind And Matter

Nigel Hawkes



The Alban Hills near Frascati, a few miles south-east of Rome, are showing signs of life. Dormant for 20,000 years, the volcanoes in the area are steadily pushing up the ground ``like a sponge-cake'' says the Italian National Institute of Geophysics. 

The area has risen by 18 ins this century, but two thirds of this has occurred in the past 15 years. Though declaring there is no immediate danger of an eruption, the institute is watching closely, for the area is large and densely-populated. 

Satellites can now be used to study these tiny movements. In Nature, three French space scientists have reported observations of Mount Etna using the ERS-1 satellite, over a period between May 1992 and October 1993 when the volcano was erupting. 

They used radar images, combining them by using the technique of interferometry, to measure the amount by which Etna had subsided. They found that the volcano was collapsing like a souffle, at a rate corresponding to a volume change of 34 million cubic metres per month. This was greater than the actual production of lava, which was 19 million cubic metres a month. 

The beauty of the system, according to Dr Didier Massonnet, of the National Centre of Space Studies in Toulouse, and his colleagues, is that the radar signals penetrate even lush vegetation, allowing active volcanoes in tropical areas to be studied. By watching the volcanoes swell, they hope to give advance warnings. 

*
04 June 1995, p.5/4

Fire & Water / Features 

Stromboli; Travel

Anthony Sattin



ANTHONY SATTIN feels the burn on the sulphurous slopes of Stromboli, while FRASER HARRISON whets his appetite for whale counting off the Isle of Mull. 

The best views of Stromboli were the first ones, from the neighbouring island of Panarea. Only from a distance did I see the volcano in all its threatening majesty, rising triangularly from the Tyrrhenian sea, chutes of volcanic dust creating a narrow shoreline, above it a towering apex blown apart with magnificent force. At the end of the day, the alchemy of slanting sun and accumulated heat produced a shimmering haze that made the island appear less defined, a shadow of itself, a ghostly apparition more appropriate, I thought, for a place of such legend. 

In 1948 Roberto Rossellini, the Italian film director, wrote: ``Very probably, you do not know the Lipari islands,'' and he was right. ``One of them, the Stromboli, is continually active. At the foot of the volcano, in a bay, springs up the little village. A few white houses, cracked by the earthquake. The inhabitants make a living out of fishing and the little they can pluck from the barren land.'' Rossellini explained elsewhere in his letter to Ingrid Bergman that he wanted her and the islanders to appear in a neo-realistic movie. They did, and before long a cocktail was named after the volcano and Stromboli was more famous as a place of illicit passion than for natural eruptions. 

Late in the afternoon, the heat less intense and a hint of a breeze coming off the sea below, a group of people were gathering outside a cafe in Stromboli's main and, by most definitions, only square. They didn't all know each other and I knew none of them, but as they were checking their torches and wrapping their panini, it was obvious that we had all come for the same thing: to climb the volcano. 

I had wanted to climb the 3,038ft to the top of Stromboli without a guide, and I could have done it. Going up is not the problem. It is coming down the dust chute that causes the pain. Alone, I would have had to come down in daylight, which would mean missing the spectacular eruptions after dark, or staying up until morning. Officially it is forbidden to stay overnight: people tend to fall asleep up there and, dreaming of primeval urges, Roman gods at their forges or whatever else takes their fancy, they roll over the rim and into the crater where they are consumed by the burning heart of the volcano, the latest offering in some age-old rite. Enough said, no? 

So there I was, following Nino, the tall Club Alpine Italiano guide, out of the village at the start of a three-and-a-half hour climb, while Prospero, his colleague, brought up the rear to help the stragglers. There were more than 40 of us, the oldest a pensioner, the youngest pre-pubescent, and the numbers, as well as variable levels of fitness, made the going slow. But that allowed me plenty of time to admire the views. 

Stromboli has never done a Vesuvius and wiped out the communities living in its shadow, though a period of serious activity earlier this century persuaded the majority of islanders to pack their bags and head for the United States. Those who stayed found that America Hollywood to be precise came to them after Rossellini got the money and the star to make his film about people whom, he thought, ``live so simply and poorly just because of that knowledge of the vanity of everything we consider civilised and necessary''. Ingrid Bergman and the inhabitants of Stromboli made a potent combination, but in the event, headlines around the world were reserved, not for the movie, but for the love between the star and the director which itself was pretty volcanic. There are love affairs and love affairs. This one was serious. It was also 1949, they were both married. Bergman had a daughter back home in Hollywood and, to add fuel to the fire, she was pregnant again by the time they left. 

Stromboli's inhabitants still fish and farm as they did before the movie, but other things on the island have changed. Now there are bidets, showers and lavatories first imported because Rossellini believed they were mandatory for stars and there are also curious strangers, who come to see the place, the people and the volcano still Europe's most active. ``And the volcano ... the volcano!'' Bergman complained, ``... we slogged for four hours upwards. After I climbed for two hours, I just sat down, gasped and said: `I'm sorry, I can't make it.' But after a rest I did make it, and at the top I could have just lain down and died.'' Until somebody spoils the fun and builds a cable car up the side, the only way of getting on top of Stromboli is by following in Ms Bergman's footsteps, and there were some in the group who would have empathised with the star. 

Stockholm Peter, for example: wheezing and sweating as he peered up at the towering volcano from the Observatory cafe, 45 minutes out of town, he said: ``Just think. We're going all the way up there because of a Swede.'' Spurred on by nationalistic pride, a sense of romance or, like Ingrid Bergman, a sheer adulterous love, Peter's partner picked up her bag and continued slogging her way up the slope. 

By eight o'clock, three quarters of an hour further up, the sun was low, the village shrinking below us, the sea like frosted glass. It was then that the volcano began to growl like a monster out of One Million Years BC, and the talking around me stopped abruptly. 

Two hours later, through the sulphurous darkness, we made out the first of the groups that had got there ahead of us to be sure of a place in one of the shelters piles of volcanic rock that were to be their hotels for the night. A father and his two young sons were sitting in one of them, American students in another, European backpackers in a third. They and many more looked at us with the sharp eye of rivalry, and then ``You're not staying the night? Oh ... well ...'' with disdain. Nino stopped to warn them about past fatalities and came away muttering about the ``Valkyrie brigade''. 

I have never seen anything like the spectacle that greeted me at the top. The volcano acted impeccably, like something out of a geographer's dream, hissing and fizzing, sending up fireworks and, when I least expected it, exploding with a shuddering roar. I understood why Romans believed that Vulcan, Jupiter's son, had his workshop there, why others believed it was the mouth of Hell, and why Jules Verne had his travellers exit this way at the end of their Journey To The Centre Of The Earth. 

The others seemed less engaged, or else completely overawed. Nino and Prospero arranged them in a row along the rim of the summit where they unwrapped their sandwiches, opened their water and, as if this were a tea in the Sahara or a snack back home, they tucked into a late Stromboli supper, gawping at the red-hot lava fires down below. Supper over, they put on warmer clothing and took photographs to prove they had been there. Then conversations turned to hotels, beaches, sex or what ever else was next on the itinerary. 

In his introductory letter to Ingrid Bergman, Rossellini explained that he wanted his heroine to discover ``the value of the eternal truth which rules human lives'' on Stromboli. A less romantic eternal truth that tiredness dulls enthusiasm was being discovered by my fellow climbers and few gave the spectacle a second look as we began our descent. 

But Stromboli isn't some second-rate sideshow. It is a constantly active volcano, and just as we turned our backs it exploded. Deafened, silenced, shaking, we came to a halt as the earth moved around us. Lava and incandescent lapilli shot across the warm night like falling stars, making my heart race, my thoughts, too, and I felt, as Rossellini had wanted his characters to feel, as he and Ingrid Bergman and so many other must have felt an eruption of happiness at being alive in this place. 

Anthony Sattin travelled as a guest of Abercrombie & Kent 

TRAVEL BRIEF 

Getting there: the best approach to Stromboli is to fly to Catania, take the airport bus to Milazzo, then hydrofoil, for which you purchase the tickets (about Pounds 5) locally. Alternatives include flying to Messina and taking a hydrofoil, or getting an overnight ferry from Naples. Carriers offering flights include Alitalia (0171-602 7111) and British Airways (0181-897 4000). Prices from Pounds 327 for midweek travel to Catania. 

Tour operators: Abercrombie & Kent (0171-730 9600) has a week on Stromboli, based on two sharing, from Pounds 681pp in June and July, including transfers and b&b accommodation. Other operators include Citalia (0181-688 9989), Italiatour (0171-371 1114) and Italian Escapades (0181-748 2661). 

Further information: guides authorised by the Club Alpine Italiano make the ascent of Stromboli every day from April to October. For information, tel: 00 39 90-98 62 63. 


06 November 1994 p.5/4

The Indian Ocean / Features 

Island Guide, Week 2; Travel

David Wickers on Seychelles and the Mascarenes and Mark Ottaway

REUNION 

CAN THIS be an Indian Ocean island? With its cloud-wrapped peaks, traffic jams, out-of-town supermarkets and lack of tropical nasties and diseases? Not really. In almost every sense save its geography this is Europe. Welcome to a departement of France, M'sieur, and a totally artificial economy supported by imports and the European taxpayer. 

Waltz through the same passport control as the locals. No need for Brits to fill in forms or audition at immigration. 

All of which might not sound worth going halfway round the world for. But don't let that put you off. If you are a surfer, a mountaineer, or already in the region, Reunion is well worth a visit. 

The island soars to 10,000ft within 13 miles of the ocean, a jagged uneroded landscape the result of relatively recent, indeed in parts continuing, volcanic activity. This is a Hawaiian (as opposed to Strombolian) volcano. Not on a fault line. Not prone to explosive eruption. On average about once a year it starts delivering glowing lava in predictable flows. But once in a geological while, the peaks empty and collapse under the weight of extruded lava to create ``circuses'', almost lost worlds with sheer 3,000ft cliffs all around. Reunion has three, one of which, the Cirque de Mafate, still cannot be reached by road. Here, just 10 miles as the hawk flies from a bustling French provincial capital is a deeply endogamous society, some of whose more elderly members have never left the valley or seen a car. 

Hikers and rock climbers return from a week or more in these mountains with rave reports. There are rainforests, volcanic wastes, dazzling air and 350 micro-climates. 

*
05 November 1994 WE/p.23

Sun and sequins / Features 

Caribbean Cruising; Travel

Ann Steele

Visiting the world's only ``drive-in'' volcano on St Lucia was an eerie experience. I reached it after a six-hour sea safari around the coast of the island (discovered by Columbus on his fourth voyage in 1502). Tourists can no longer walk freely around the bubbling sulphur springs since a guide slipped in and was badly burnt some years ago. Nearby, local women wash clothes in a hot stream. 

To escape the heat, I cooled off in the rich mineral waters of the Diamond Bath, just outside the town of Soufriere, in one of the most beautiful gardens in the Caribbean. It was built 200 years ago by Napoleon's troops to soothe their weary bodies; today it costs tired tourists $6 (about Pounds 3.50) to bathe there. 

Saint-Pierre was the economic and cultural capital of Martinique until 1902 when it was destroyed by the eruption of Mount Pelee. I'll never forget the twisted molten church bell or the ordinary household items such as a sewing machine and an iron at the Museum of Volcanology. The whole town of 30,000 was killed by molten lava except for one man, a prisoner in an underground cell. He survived terrible burns only to wind up as an exhibit touring the world in Barnum's circus. 


Happy memories linger long in the Caribbean. 

Ann Steele 

Ann Steele was a guest of Cunard Lines (071-491 3930). A two-week Caribbean cruise on the Cunard Countess costs from Pounds 1,395, including return flights, and takes in 11 islands. A one-week cruise (from Pounds 895) includes six or seven islands. Christmas and New Year cruises start from Pounds 1,595. 


*
27 July 1994, p.15

Big bang history / Leading articles 


What better explanation than a great big disaster? 

Catastrophe is suddenly back on the cast-list as an explanation of the past. Reputable scientists now dare suggest that some cosmic collision finished off classical civilisation and brought on the Dark Ages in Europe. 

Those infallible clocks that are buried in rocks and tree-rings record a world disaster around AD 534, followed by a sudden slowing of tree growth in America and Europe lasting for about 15 years. Fallible human chronicles for the same date record that the Sun became dim for years. 

From China to Britain accounts survive of famine, pestilence, wars, crop failures and urban and economic decline. In parts of China the population suddenly decreased by 80 per cent; and in AD 534 the Chinese emperor ordered the half a million inhabitants to evacuate his imperial capital of Loyang for no recorded reason. In Constantinople the plague arrived and started the dwindling that was to reduce the population of the Byzantine imperial capital from 500,000 to 25,000. 

The evidence from both carbon-dating and chronicles points to massive pollution of the atmosphere and a kind of nuclear winter. No other natural disaster on record spread its ripples right round the world in this way. A conventional interpretation of such evidence would be to postulate some vast volcanic eruption, like the one on Thera (Santorini) around 1,500 BC, which has been blamed for everything from the widespread legends of floods to the parting of the Red Sea for the Israelites and the sudden destruction of the Minoan civilisation. But Thera left its unmistakable signature on the ice cores dug from miles down in the Greenland ice-cap, which plot the volcanic history of the planet for the past 9,000 years. These record no volcanic eruption in the 530s. 

Some scientists now advance the theory that the worldwide cataclysm of 534 was caused by the impact of a giant meteor or fragments of a comet, like the pieces of Shoemaker Levy-9 that collided with Jupiter a week ago. Although they have yet to identify a plausible footprint for such an earth-shaking crash, it could be under water or have been mistaken for the crater of a volcano. 

As an explanation for history or geology, catastrophe used to belong to the dark ages of superstition. For the past two centuries evolution has increasingly been seen as a uniform process in which everyday forces have shaped the Earth and the history of its inhabitants. Then it became scientifically respectable to speculate that dinosaurs were extinguished by some cosmic catastrophe. Now it turns out that the Dark Ages for humans may have been caused by some such collision with a comet. Next? 

*
24 July 1994 p.1/22

Scientists link rising temperatures to worldwide loss of human cool / Home news 

Sean Ryan and Lois Rogers



THE heatwaves sweeping much of the northern hemisphere have intensified scientific debate about possible changes in climate and humans' tendency to respond with a startling degree of eccentricity. 

Exceptional summer weather has been reported in the United States, Europe and Asia, and global temperatures around 0.3C higher than the 1950-1980 average are likely to make 1994 one of the world's hottest years on record. 

The heat has been blamed for an international outbreak of irrationality, attributed by doctors to an increase in blood volume that starves brains of their normal levels of oxygen. 

Stefan Effenberg, a German soccer star sent home in disgrace from the World Cup for making obscene gestures at his own supporters, claimed he had been driven to it by the extreme heat in Dallas. In Copenhagen, a conference of semi-professional Santas ended when delegates stripped to their boxer shorts and red woolly caps and dived into the municipal fountains. 

Scientists believe this year's warm weather, in which July temperatures are up to 4C hotter than normal in England, has been accentuated by the disappearance from the stratosphere of millions of tonnes of debris flung there by Mount Pinatubo, a volcano in the Philippines, in 1991. 

Bill McGuire, professor of vulcanology at University College, London, said the eruption had produced a global cooling of 0.4C which appeared to have gone into reverse. ``Over the last two years, Pinatubo may have depressed a tendency towards warming which is now coming through again.'' 

Sir John Houghton, a former director-general of the Met Office and now co-chairman of a group of experts advising the United Nations on climate, said temperatures appeared to be rising faster over land than sea. ``We cannot definitely say we are seeing global warming but this is consistent with it,'' he said. 


*
20 May 1994, p.13

El Llaima volcano / Overseas news 

Chile


El Llaima volcano spewing vast clouds of smoke, ash and lava over the Andean lake district, 400 miles south of Santiago, Chile, in its first eruption for 37 years. Ash was reported to have been blown as far as Zapala, in Argentina, 120 miles away. Most of the 750,000 people living in the shadow of the 10,000ft mountain are not believed to be in immediate danger. The dust thrown into the upper atmosphere is likely to affect the global climate for a decade, and cause spectacular dawns and sunsets. 

*
14 May 1994, SP/p.2

Black magic, blue rinse / Features 

Channel-Hopping; Television

David Flusfeder



David Flusfeder makes his pick of the week's programmes across all channels 

ENCOUNTERS: Fire Mountains 

Tomorrow, Sunday, C4, 7pm 

THIS documentary about the people who live and work and celebrate by the volcanoes of Java starts magnificently: a montage of lava and eruption and volcanic fire, in all its colourful grandeur. The rest of the programme is a bit of a let down. The footage is always beautiful, but the voice-over is in that ponderous awesome-mysteries-of-the-east style, and the two focuses of attention seem to be randomly edited together, to the detriment of both: the Hindu festival on the side of one volcano, and the group of Muslim ``farmers'' whose awesomely tough work entails harvesting bright yellow crystals of sulphur from inside the volcano and then lugging them 20 kilometres away where they will sell them by weight. 

Stunning, poorly conceived look at Javanese volcano societies. 

*
11 April 1994, p.19

The Eruption Of Vesuvius / Features 

11 April 1906; On This Day



The first recorded eruption of Vesuvius was in 79AD when Pompeii was overwhelmed. Since then, numerous eruptions have occurred, many with disastrous results. The one reported here destroyed the town of Ottajano. 

THE ERUPTION OF VESUVIUS. DISTRESSING SCENES. (FROM OUR OWN CORRESPONDENT.) NAPLES, APRIL 10. 

Last night was a quiet one in Naples. On Sunday night there was a notable diminution in the activity of the volcano, which is now still further decreasing. The intermittent explosions and continuous rumble below are only to be heard at comparatively close quarters; the change of wind carries the dense cloud of ashes out to sea, stretching a thick veil between Naples itself and the coast line of Castellammare and Sorrento; and, what is more important, the slow course of the lava streams is stayed at Torre Annunziata and Torre del Greco, though there was still a discernible movement this morning in the stream which branched off near Torre Annunziata towards Pompeii. Professor Mattucci, who has regained his post of observation, reports a decided amelioration in the symptoms and has expressed his belief that the worst is over. 

Naples has to-day resumed its normal life, though very far from its normal aspect. Though the ashes have ceased for the moment to fall on the town, they lie inches deep in all 

the streets, rising in clouds of fine impalpable dust and thickly coating both houses and wayfarers. It appears a grey city inhabited by grey ghosts, which is at least an improvement upon Saturday and Sunday nights, when the threatening thunder of the volcano, a thick pall of darkness torn by distant flashes of volcanic explosions, and a suffocating atmosphere made it resemble an ante-chamber of hell. The Neapolitans, too, have taken courage again, and the pitiful little processions bearing a holy image or picture, sometimes composed of only a dozen or so of half-distraught peasant women, have now deserted the streets, though even last night they were still to be seen here and there. If the appearance of Naples is still forlorn enough, that of the threatened towns is most wretched. Torre Annunziata seems utterly abandoned save by a few carabinieri and troops, who mount guard in its empty streets. Torre del Greco is in little better ease. Resina and Portici suffered less in the general panic, but were deserted temporarily by a good many of the inhabitants, who are now returning to their homes. Bosco-Trecase is destroyed. The villages on the north-east of VesuviusOttajano, San Giuseppe, and TerzignoI have not yet been able to see, but from all reports their condition is sufficiently deplorable. 

From San Giuseppe is reported the only serious loss of life. The roof of the old church, long known to be unsafe, succumbed, it is supposed, to the added weight of ashes and volcanic debris and fell in, burying in its ruins a great number of women and old people who were gathered in prayer to avert the destruction of their town. According to the last accounts, 37 dead bodies have been extricated, besides a number of injured. A report of a similar disaster at Terzigno is now denied, though that town also has suffered severely from the hail of redhot stones and debris ... 


*
10 February 1994, p.11

Vesuvius threatens a million / Overseas news 

Nigel Hawkes



AN ERUPTION of Vesuvius could engulf a million people within 15 minutes, causing disaster on an unprecedented scale, three scientists have calculated. 

An area four miles in radius around the summit of the volcano would be wiped out at horrifying speed. They call for effective evacuation plans, new roads, and the depopulation of the area to diminish the risks. Better methods of forecasting eruptions are also needed. 

Vesuvius, dormant since 1944, overlooks Naples. In AD 79 the towns of Pompeii and Herculaneum were destroyed by an eruption. 

Writing in Nature, Dr Flavio Dobran of New York University and Italian colleagues used data from past eruptions to create a computer model. Vesuvius has long been silent but no volcano is ever extinct, he contends. 

*
17 January 1994, p.12

Raining cats and Filipinos / Features 

Peter Barnard



If you were wondering what has happened to the weather, look to the Pacific, says Peter Barnard. 

With Chichester gone Venetian and bits sliding off the Isle of Wight, yesterday's weather was a positive relief for most of us: gales, sleet and snow make a change from emptying water out of the ceiling light fittings. 

But even this pick'n'mix of misery has failed to flush out the superstars who dominated the weather charts a mere two years ago, the meteorological Madonnas who toured the globe with arms raised towards the heavens. 

We followed their upward gaze transfixed and saw ... the ozone layer. Or rather, we didn't, for even in the best of times the ozone layer, being made of gas, has proved less than photogenic. 

The Met men, nonetheless, wanted us to know that in places the ozone layer wasn't there at all. We had blown a hole in it with our underarm deodorants and our fancy cars. And then there was global warming, a related disaster, as a result of which the Earth would warm up and it would rain more often. More often? It hardly seems possible. 

Oddly, the doom merchants have been silent through the wettest December since goodness knows when. Even as we welly our way through January, climatologists (halfway decent universities have a couple, self-respecting ones have a whole department) refuse to strut their stuff on the stage of Armageddon. 

The reason is the truth. And the truth of this sloshing winter is that it is all got up by foreigners. Filipinos, if you must. What we are wading through is a meteorological Peking flu. The English weather, per se, is not at fault. 

In June of 1991, Mount Pinatubo in the Philippines erupted, and then some. It was a spectacular human tragedy and as such it was famous for 15 minutes. 

However, 30 months on, Pinatubo has come back to haunt the rest of the world. The result is running into your drains: or even worse, not running into your drains. 

Phil Jones, of the University of East Anglia's climatic research centre, was a lead runner in the global warming stakes, which reached its peak in 1990. The work of Mr Jones and, in particular, Sir Crispin Tickell, formerly our man at the UN, is credited with the greening of Margaret Thatcher. 

Jones and Co are sticking to their guns but ozone depletion and global warming are long-term phenomena, whereas a winter of discontent is but a passing frisson. 

Mr Jones explains: ``There has been a lot of press comment in America asking whatever happened to global warming? But the wet weather here and the excessively dry conditions in parts of California and Australia have nothing to do with that. 

``Pinatubo is the culprit. The dust rises in to the upper atmosphere and the effect is a warming one. And the Earth's radiation balance changes, which, as temperatures start to cool back, leads to extremes of weather. The normal airstream flow around the globe is west-east but in conditions like these you get more of a north-south flow and that obviously influences weather patterns.'' 

Even before the eruption, warming was evident, with 1990 and 1991 being the warmest pair of years ever recorded: compared with the average for the period 1950-79, global temperatures in those years were 0.4 and 0.35 centigrade above average respectively. 

But part of the effect of the eruption at Pinatubo is shown by the statistics for 1992 and 1993, when the average was exceeded by 0.19 and 0.27 centigrade. Now temperatures are cooling again. 

This tends to make for a confusion of signals between volcanic eruptions and global warming, which reinforces the split in scientific circles about the extent of the warming process. Forecasts in the late Eighties had the polar ice caps melting and flowing down the streets of Norwich; subsequent estimates say that for that to happen temperatures would have to rise far higher than even the most alarmist predictions. 

There is even a view, supported by research at Edinburgh University, that global warming could cause ice caps to get thicker rather than thinner, thus reducing sea levels rather than increasing them. 

The reason is that higher temperatures at the poles would increase snowfall and lead to more ice, not less. This theory is attractive to mere mortals because it encourages more complacency, not less. 

For the time being, we can wallow in the twin British satisfactions of bemoaning the weather and blaming foreigners, even if the foreigners in question can hardly help it. Indeed, they may well regard wading through Chichester as an easier option than living under a volcano. 

As for the chances of scorching summer to compensate for present horrors, nobody is willing to put a wet shirt on it. As with politics, a week in meteorology is a long time. June is a light year away. 

There is, however, a small portion of recent history smiling on people who prefer Factor 25 to a mackintosh. Indeed the real message of the Great Wet Out may be good tidings for all but the water boards and those who obsessively hose their plants every time the sun puts in an appearance. 

The present downpour roughly follows the pattern of the mid-1970s and mid-1980s. Those spells were followed by a brief drought in 1975-76 and a much longer one between 1988-92. In fact Mr Jones says that prolonged droughts in Britain tend to outlast prolonged wet spells. Better check the standpipes haven't sunk without trace. 

*
15 June 1995, SP/p.7

Books with character / Features 

the American Civil War with Martin Sheen;  Werner with a camera; New On Video

Geoff Brown
WERNER HERZOG 

Tartan, E 

IF A volcano is going to erupt, Werner Herzog will be there in the thick of the lava, camera in hand. So it is in La Soufriere, one of four documentaries by this intrepid German director. The others include How Much Wood would a Woodchuck Chuck, an entertaining report on livestock auctioneers, and The Great Ecstasy of Woodcarver Steiner, following Steiner's eccentric progress from Swiss woodcarver to world ski-jump champion. 

*
17 December 1994, WE/p.1

The Times Red Cross appeal / Features 

By Ruth Gledhill
Kibumba camp, with 200,000 refugees, squats at the foot of the Nyaragongo volcano, which last erupted in 1987, and which sometimes glows an apocalyptic red in the night, its burning rocks reflecting a hellish halo onto the clouds above, its lava rising at the rate of ten metres a month. Nyamurigara volcano, above the nearby Mugunga camp run by the World Vision agency with 200,000 refugees, is also active. According to a Japanese team investigating seismic activity, Nyaragongo could erupt before December next year and Nyamurigara before March. The Red Cross is already seeking out a new site for the refugees. Aid workers on their days off climb the volcano, peer over the edge if it is not too hot, and stop on their way down to commune with the placid mountain gorillas in the national park, a park which is being visibly denuded by the pressing need for firewood.

*
20 October 1994, p.9

5ft worms found on deep-sea volcano / Home news 

Riftia pachyptila

By Nigel Hawkes

GIANT 5ft tubeworms have been found at the bottom of the Pacific around the vents of submarine volcanoes. 

The worms, Riftia pachyptila, were found 8,000ft down in the east Pacific by the submersible Alvin. Although the deep oceans are thought of as inhospitable, three visits to the spot showed that the tubeworms flourish there. 

On the first visit, in April 1991, a subsea volcano had recently erupted and fresh lava could be seen. In March 1992, the area was visited again and, although it showed some signs of life, there were no giant tubeworms. 

When the submersible returned 18 months later, American and French scientists report in Nature, large numbers of the tubeworms were found. This means, they say, that they must have been growing at almost 3ft a year, the fastest growth rate recorded for a marine invertebrate. 

The team, led by Dr Richard Lutz of Rutgers University in New Jersey, says that since the deep-sea volcanoes were discovered in 1977 there has been growing evidence that creatures may grow very rapidly in the nutrient-rich waters created by the volcanic eruptions. 

*

23 July 1994 WE/p.21

`A hard day's work beside my blue lagoon' / Features 

Travel

Richard Morrison



HAWAII: The attentions of a bronzed young maiden help Richard Morrison to forget his sunburn. 

Put aside those images of Honolulu as ``Highrise-on-Surf'', the Miami of the Pacific, swarming with low life and high prices. Yes, Honolulu is as garish as you imagined, and then some. But the Hawaiian archipelago consists of 132 islands, trailing westward across the north Pacific towards Japan. And paradise still prevails in 131 of them. 

The air is sparkling clean, there being no heavy industry within 2,000 miles. The ocean is as warm as a bath and so clear that, when you snorkel, the fish glint beneath your nose like peripatetic Smarties. In the winter months, migrating humpback whales frolic harmlessly just off the beaches, leaping and spouting for the visitors' delight, looking for all the world as if they had been booked by Lew Grade for the season. 

And waves? Well, they don't come any bigger, if big is what you want. The island of Maui boasts the world's greatest surf, and the whole surf culture with its charming, laid-back, dropped-out, tuned-in, turned-on devotees is as big in some resorts here as in Sydney. 

But these hyper-active beaches are easily avoided by those of the more seden tary persuasion. Being something of a small-wave connoisseur myself, I preferred to drift motionless in the palm-fringed, white-sanded blue lagoons. And although these hotel-run lagoons don't have Brooke Shields on hand, they do have deeply-bronzed young men and maidens who set up your sun umbrella, bring you cooling drinks, and offer to massage sunblock into your peeling shoulders. 

Deeply bronzed young maiden: Aloha, sir! May I carry your deckchair? 

Me (embarrassed): Oh, please don't bother, it's not heavy. 

DBYM: No sirree. You're on holiday. You mustn't do anything. 

Me (sweating): No, actually I'm working. (Giggle of non-comprehension from DBYM.) I'm a journalist writing about Hawaii. 

DBYM: Oh my goodness, your back is so red! Here, let me rub sunblock into it. I have gentle fingers. 

Me (sweating more profusely): No, please, I am English. 

DBYM (sweetly): Well then, you just think of England while I do it. 

And so it went on. One has to take the rough with the smooth in this job. 

Perhaps you suspect that I never left my blue lagoon. Untrue. The Hawaiian islands there are eight main ones are so spectacular that you would have to be a particularly obtuse type of vegetable not to explore. The best way is by helicopter, for which you must pay handsomely, perhaps Pounds 80 for an hour's trip. It's worth it. 

On the Big Island trip (Hawaii itself) you go straight over Kilauea, the world's most active volcano. Most of the helicopter pilots tell you that they learnt their flying in 'Nam, and appear not to have lost the taste for danger. They hover a few feet over the volcano craters so that you can savour the heat of the 2,000F molten orange lava. You will never complain about the office air-conditioning again. 

Then they take you down to the coast where that same lava hits the sea, producing huge clouds of steam and then solidifying into the black, lunar landscape that dominates this island. Amazingly, the immaculate Ritz Carlton Hotel at Mauni Lani, on the east coast, has been built on this solidified lava, though you would never think it when you look out of your bedroom window and see the acres of lush, green championship golf course surrounding you. 

The other helicopter trip, on the island of Maui, was equally spectacular. No active volcanos here, but there are plunging valleys and waterfalls. And extraordinary changes of vegetation. Although the leeward coasts get so little rain that you can virtually guarantee 14 baking hours of sun any day of the year, the interiors get more rain than Manchester. Indeed, from the air the rain forests are so dense that the treetops seem like a spectacularly woven Wilton carpet. ``Spielberg filmed Jurassic Park here,'' yelled my helicopter pilot, as we flew up a giant waterfall that seemed to flow from the clouds. 

This balmy climate, allied to the fertile lava-rich soil, is also what gives Hawaii its glorious horticulture. On the island of Lanai I stayed at the Manele Bay Hotel, where the rooms are built, Renaissance-style, round courtyards with sumptuous gardens, and the corridors are stacked with Hawaiian, Chinese and Polynesian art. The same hotel also runs a Lodge up in the hills at Koele: an extraordinary mansion, rather like an eccentric Oxbridge college, with a vast central hall stuffed full of astonishing artefacts. 

Another surprise was Hawaiian cooking. Even in the big hotels, bold local cuisine is operated in parallel with the standard international fare and it is delicious, full of startling new fish and vegetable tastes. But the renaissance in Hawaiian cuisine is just one aspect of the revival of native Hawaiian culture. You don't even have to leave the hotels to realise that. The Ritz Carlton at Kapalua (on Maui) incorporates an ancient burial ground into its grounds; indeed, the sacred place was discovered during excavations for the hotel, and the hotel site was moved elsewhere out of respect for native sensibilities. And on Big Island dozens of ancient fishponds and caves inhabited by the first Hawaiians when they made their intrepid crossings from the Polynesian Islands six centuries ago have been restored. 

Even we heritage-obsessed British can be impressed by the diligence with which Hawaiian history is being preserved. A guided tour can be an illuminating step back into an ancient culture and that history, of course, includes the Hawaiian version of how Captain Cook met his violent end in these islands. To cut a grisly story short, the Hawaiians say he deserved it for behaving like a bloody idiot. 

To this English traveller, however, the Hawaiians were generosity personified. The ``Aloha'' spirit means a lot more than pretty girls garlanding you in airport lounges with a fragrant lei, though I didn't strenuously object to that. The tranquillity of these islands is infectious. I dream of my blue lagoons still, but the sunburn is a bit better now, thanks. 

How to get there 

Richard Morrison was a guest of United Airlines (081-990 9988) and of Elegant Resorts, 24 Nicholas Street, Chester CH1 1ER (0244 325620). 

Price for ten nights: from Pounds 1,995 per person, including an overnight stop at the Ritz Carlton, San Francisco, three nights at the Ritz Carlton, Kapalua (Maui), three nights at the Manele Bay (Lanai) and three nights at the Ritz Carlton, Mauna Lani (Hawaii). Price for seven nights: from Pounds 1,370 per person at the Ritz Carlton Mauna Lani, including a night at the Ritz Carlton, San Francisco. Both prices include return economy class flights with United Airlines, inter-island flights with Aloha Airlines, and all private transfers. 

For further details, contact Elegant Resorts.

*
03 April 1994, p.8/45

Over the volcanoes / Features 

Hawaii's Big Island; Travel

Jan McGirk


Jan McGirk takes to the summit trails as she treks across Hawaii's Big Island in search of volcanic activity. 

Rich coffee steamed in our breakfast mugs, but we couldn't linger over it. To see the plumes of steam and sulphur hissing up from the lava bed, we had to hit Volcanoes National Park before full sun-up. 

This was, after all, the very reason we had come to the Big Island, the easternmost in Hawaii's chain of eight. We wanted to watch the earth seethe in an active caldera, where the lava is still molten just a foot or two beneath the crust. 

We took a path that was lined with giant tree ferns and petered out on to Steaming Bluff, a raised basin of brittle black stone. Fissures were fringed with delicately plaited, glittering strands of black and grey minerals. Chunks of pumice crunched underfoot and yellow-rimmed potholes at our feet puffed out putrid fumes. My sons pocketed a couple of pieces of loose lava as keepsakes of this eerie place. 

Back at the breakfast table, the landlady, Joan Morse, dished out papaya halves heaped high with pineapple and macadamia nuts. The conversation strayed to Madame Pele, the vengeful fire goddess said to sleep in the Kilauea Caldera. 

We had spied offerings to her, flower leis (garlands) and cigars left on the edge of the crater. A psychiatrist from San Francisco and a doll salesman from Brisbane debated whether the heiau a temple of human sacrifice erected by a Tahitian priest in the 12th century was meant to appease this female spirit. 

The latest lava flow had skirted around the old temple at Wahaula but destroyed the government visitor centre a mere 150yds away. While guidebooks were brandished and Jungian jargon spat out, Mrs Morse rolled her eyes. 

``Every day I get parcels in the post. People know that Pele gets riled easy, but lava makes a nice souvenir. Bad things start to happen as soon as they leave the island, so they send the stuff back. We try to figure out exactly where it came from, but Pele isn't real picky. Just wants it back here.'' 

Sheepishly, the guests eyed one another and each of us guiltily plunked down a lump of cursed lava beside our plates. 

``Without Pele, we wouldn't have much island left,'' Mrs Morse added. ``Best take those rocks along on your next hike and chuck 'em back where they belong.'' 

There are not many spots on Hawaii where lava would be out of place. Two hulking volcanoes, Mauna Loa and Mauna Kea, are over 13,000ft high and dominate the horizon, and rubble from cinder cones lines most roads. Where eruptions are recent, the land is starkly barren, but the rich volcanic soil becomes quickly overgrown. 

Plantations of coffee and macadamia nuts thrive in the highlands, and lush rainforest gardens grow orchids and anthuriums (those fake-looking red flowers with odd phallic stamens). Beach sand comes in startling shades of black or olive green as well as the more prosaic golden grains. Cowboys ride the ranges, while astronomers scan the clearest skies in America. 

The brutal landscape seems to summon heroic feats to match: the Ironman triathlon, a gruelling race which requires a 2.4-mile swim, a 112-mile bicycle ride, plus a 26.2-mile marathon, brings hundreds of athletes here every October. 

Offshore, game fishermen stalk monster marlin while daytrippers scan the water for whales. 

But paradise need not be pre-packaged on the Big Island. Fly over, rent a car and just poke around at your own pace, leaving the condominiums on the Kona coast to the honeymooners. 

There is a network of three dozen b&bs across the Big Island, and prices start at $40 per night. Mrs Morse runs a free reservation service from her own unpretentious establishment, ``My Island'' (0101 808-967 7216), and will even recommend rivals in the town of Volcano if her 100-year-old house is fully booked. For those who prefer more privacy, she also rents out three garden bungalows. 

The high-profile tourism of hula shows, helicopter tours and glass-bottomed boats does exist in Hawaii, but nowhere is more remote from all this than Waipio Valley on the northeastern shore. 

A precipitous path leads down to a perfect black sand beach, cut by a stream, which gives the warm rollers a cool backwash. Waterfalls cascade down a thousand feet from towering cliffs, and wild horses graze in the back black taro fields. Jeeps and mule carts take tourist groups on forays, but most ramblers and campers struggle down on foot. 

The 45-minute hike back up a 25-degree slope left us breathless, and not solely because of the view. We were glad to bed down at the Waipio Wayside Inn (0101 808-775 0275); a comfortable 1930s home with bathrooms stocked with lotions and potions to counteract sunburn and muscle strain. 

We did not leave the Big Island before searching out the last corner of Britain in the former Sandwich Isles. This is an obelisk in Kealakekua Bay, where the explorer, James Cook, returned three days after being received as a living god. Sailing in on a broken ship from an inauspicious direction, he was bludgeoned to death by terrified Hawaiians. 

Thankfully, the welcome is considerably more friendly these days. 

Getting there: There are no direct flights from the UK to Hawaii; most route through Los Angeles. Air New Zealand (081-741 2299) flies four times a week from Gatwick via Los Angeles where you can pick up connecting flights to Honolulu; midweek Apex fares from Pounds 638 return; Continental Airlines (0293-776464) flies from Gatwick to New York, Huston or Denver for a connecting flight to Honolulu the following day, American Airlines (081-572 5555) has daily flights to Los Angeles from Heathrow and daily connecting flights on to Honolulu. United Airlines (081-990 9900) flies daily from Heathrow to Honolulu via Los Angeles or San Francisco. Virgin (0293-747747) flies daily to Honolulu via Los Angeles. Midweek Apex fares start from Pounds 724. 

*
23 January 1994 p.8/48

Italian Islands / Features 

Ultimate guide; Part 2; Travel

David Wickers



Vulcano for mud baths, Pantelleria for celebs. In this last of a two part guide, David Wickers selects the best Italian islands for you. 

AEOLIAN ISLANDS 


Salina 

A twin-peaked island, with twin ports, the hydrofoils stopping at both on their way to and from Lipari. Salina is the greenest of the Aeolian islands, but neglected because of its more glamorous sisters. I'd recommend a visit rather than a stay, stepping ashore at Rinella and taking the bus up the valley, over the saddle bridging the volcanic mounds, past Salina's soccer pitch, which enjoys the only patch of flat land, and down to the port of Santa Marina di Salina on the opposite coast. 

The ride, past cultivated terraces of Malvasia vines, a sweet but heady wine, through the villages of Leni and Malfa, is delightful, made all the more fun by impromptu stops by the driver to pick up deliveries, walk the elderly to their front door, tickle children etc. If you want to stay, choose the 15-room Le Ariana (010 39 90-980 9075), an old patrician villa overlooking Rinella. 


Stromboli 

A living volcano, among the world's most active. At 10-minute intervals, a salvo of sparks and steam is propelled from the crater and molten lava flows down into the sea. It has to perform, otherwise it would explode. For obvious reasons, the main village is on the opposite side of the action. It is a fairly dishevelled community with mainly rooms to rent Stromboli attracts a lot of Swiss, Austrians and Germans in boots and backpacks, who come both to hike and enjoy the island's big black beach. 

To see the volcano at its best or worst you need either to climb to the crater, a five-hour tough roundhaul for which a guide is essential (two tourists fell off last year), or take a boat excursion to the raw side of the island (the price includes dinner at a second hamlet, Ginostra, just outside the line of fire). Both trips are more spectacular at night, which means an overnight stay, most agreeable at La Sciara (010 39 90-986004), which has a superb pool, gardens and some 60 rooms stuffed with family heirlooms and artworks. 

Vulcano 

Whereas Stromboli looks the part, with its perfect cone, clear smoke signals, fireworks and rumbles, Vulcano offers a more intimate contact with the dark forces. It is a most peculiar place, reeking of rotten eggs, steaming with vapours, bubbling with hot springs, streaked by weird colours and famous for its al fresco mud baths, where people sit up to their necks in slime, smear their faces like ghosts and then huddle like gnomes over steam vents in the rocks. Vulcano is also easier to climb around an hour to the summit. 

Apart from the feeling of landing on a geological time bomb, quietly simmering away waiting for the next big bang, Vulcano's general atmosphere is very exotic, almost Caribbean in a sultry sort of way. Most people come on day trips, swelling the 550 inhabitants to 16,000 in August, but it is worth a night or two at either of two hotels, the four-star Sables Noirs (010 39 90-985 2014) or more modest, lively Conti (010 39 90-985 2012), both on Potente Bay's attractive and sheltered black sand beach. The rest of the island, beyond the volcano's bulk, is fairly conventional and well forested, although everything man-made tends to the unsightly. 

Alicudi 

An island that looks just what it is, the summit of a volcano, straight up, flat top, and straight down again on the other side. A few houses cling to the gradients by their nails, others form a more concentrated community beside the small grey pebble beach where the fishermen park their boats. And that's about it. Divers get excited, but I can't think of anyone else who would, and there are much more attractive islands to lose yourself on. 



PANTELLERIA 

Pantelleria 

Italy's most westerly outpost, an unusual, moody, interesting island, is clearly on the map. Since Armani bought one of the distinctive domed-roofed, Arabian-style dammusi houses and Michelle Pfeiffer came to holiday, Pantelleria is fast becoming voguish. It is an island not of our time, very different from all others, with pleasures that are almost purely scenic. The beaches are few, dark and rocky, its main town a monster, bombed to rubble by the Americans and rebuilt without a care, and the tourist development, concentrated in the northeast corner, is painful on the eyes. 

From the air, Pantelleria looks like a gigantic green brain, the terraced hills parcelled by dark lava walls into hundreds of small plots of low-slung vines for Moscato wine and rambling capers. The style of cultivation, including curious structures like gun emplacements built to protect single orange trees, as well as the unique rural architecture and several place names, was established by the Arabs. Pantelleria's volcanic origins have put a stamp of pleasures everywhere: natural saunas in mountain caves, paths along the ridge of the vast caldera, views of Africa just 43 miles away from the pine-covered summit of Monte Grande, numerous birds on and around a crater lake called the Mirror of Venus, and there is bathing in Roman hot springs. Go on a round-the-island boat ride and the skipper will even cook octopus in a patch of boiling sea. 


USTICA 

A remote volcanic pimple, some 40 miles north of Sicily, with no siblings. All the way out in the hydrofoil you ask yourself, can it be worth the ride? The answer is a tub-thumping yes. Ustica comes right at the top of my class of 27 islands. 

Ustica's fretted coast doesn't have beaches, but does have everything else: scenery, cultivated and wild, clear water, grottoes (one Blue, one Green, one Golden, one Secret...) and a pretty town, part waterfront, part hilltop, centred on a piazza adorned with leafy trees and scores of beautifully painted murals. The carabinieri even allowed a seascape of seagulls and sailboats on the front of the nick. 

On top of all its tangible qualities, the islanders so obviously care about their island. Ustica's transformation from a penal colony, most recently for Fascist dissidents, to a place of gentle, sensitive tourism, has lots to do with Ercole Gargano, who grafted the spectacularly sited Grotta Azzurra (010 39 91-844 9048 or 9567), with its terraced gardens and splendid pool, on to a wall of rock, as well as defining the pattern of development, or non-development, for the rest of the island. The hotel is now owned by a Palermo consortium which is still finding its feet, but with its newly refurbished rooms it has potentially one of the best hotels in Italy. 

There is a wide choice of alternative accommodation, from simple country houses for rent to the Club Villaggio Punta Spalmatore (010 39 91-844 9388), a friendly, low-rise giant full of fun and the sporting life, though not for everyone. 

Ustica is unique in its commitment to conservation of both land and sea. The marine reserve, which forms a ring around the coast, in some places zoned to prohibit even swimming, was the first in Italy (there are now 22, but Ustica's is still way ahead). There are guided snorkelling trips, glass-hulled-boat rides, an underwater archeological trail, with ancient anchors and amphorae in situ, and an aquarium. As one reservist told me: ``There's no point in saving the whale unless we save everything else in its food chain.'' 

Getting there: by hydrofoil from Palermo. 

David Wickers travelled to the Italian islands as a guest of Abercrombie & Kent. 


*
1996
Hotter-than-ever world adds to fear of climate change
Nick Nuttall, Environment Correspondent
Warning on greenhouse effect THE Earth last year was at its hottest since records began. Scientists at the Meteorological Office's Hadley Centre for Climate Prediction and Research said yesterday that, on average, the world's temperature is 1C higher than in 1860, when measurements were first properly recorded.
The United Nations team of climate scientists charged with advising governments about the myth or reality of global warming recently concluded that the world is in the grip of a greenhouse effect that is at least partly attributable to mankind's carbon emissions.
They said: "The balance of evidence suggests a discernible human influence on global climate through emissions of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases."
The official figures for 1995 confirm their fears that, by 2050, the world could be 2C hotter unless urgent action is taken. While this may not appear a huge increase, a permanent shift in global temperatures of this magnitude could have devastating effects on agriculture, wildlife and water supplies.
Dr Phil Jones of the University of East Anglia's Climate Research Unit in Norwich, which has helped the Meteorological Office to compile the figures, said yesterday: "The way to understand it is by comparison with last year's temperature in Britain. It was 10.5C or one degree above the average. A lot of people thought it was very hot last year. What might they think if years became two degrees higher, which is a lot warmer?"
Scientists still cannot say for certain how the world's climate will behave. The missing links are the levels of rainfall likely over different continents, and whether the Gulf Stream, which warms Britain, might shift south, causing cooling rather than heating.
Some research indicates that amounts of rainfall in northern latitudes will remain the same but will fall in sudden downpours, triggering landslips, contaminating rivers with run-off from the land and making it harder for water companies to collect enough to meet supplies.
The new figures show that, on average, surface temperature last year was 0.4C above the 1961-1990 average, which is the 30-year yardstick against which measurements are made. Previously, 1990 had been recorded as the warmest year, with temperatures climbing to an average 0.36C above the 30-year level.
Some parts of the world were, as predicted by computer climate models, significantly hotter than the average in 1995. In parts of Siberia, where scientists have been chronicling changes in plant life and a northward shift in the tree line consistent with global warming, temperatures were 3C higher than normal.
Ocean surface temperatures near the Azores were 1C above normal.
The gradual warming of the Earth's surface was slowed down by the eruption of Mount Pinatubo in the Philippines in June 1991. The volcano pumped thousands of tons of dust into the atmosphere, creating a veil that filtered the Sun's rays. Researchers say the dust effect has now disappeared and warming has recommenced.
Dr Jones said: "1995 was the warmest year yet and we would expect gradually to get more and more of these. They will go on. It's all down to burning fossil fuels and the release of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere from power stations. To slow it down, we have really got to do something and that is where the political side of things comes in."
While Britain and Germany are pushing hard for cuts in emissions beyond 2000, scientists are concerned that America, the most important country in climate negotiations, is being overwhelmed by lobbying from industry and big business.
Researchers investigating the likely effect of climatic change on the frequency of food poisoning have found evidence suggesting that the food industry, and not the housewife, is to blame for the rising number of cases.
A team at the University of East Anglia compared the number of cases of food poisoning in England and Wales with the average monthly temperatures and found the crucial factor was the temperature of the previous month, and not the month in which the food was consumed, suggesting the food was contaminated on the farm or in the food processing industry rather than in the home.

*
1996
East meets West
David Wickers
LONDON-LOS ANGELES
LOS ANGELES-HAWAII
Kilauea, the world's most active volcano, is a live performance. You can walk on the still-fuming surface of its crater, which feels as fickle as the crust of a hot loaf. Fortunately it is not a volcano with a fiery, unpredictable temper, but one that steadily pours molten lava down its slopes and into the sea in a catastrophic fury of steam. I stood yards from the flow until the heat of the road started to come through the soles of my trainers.
As well as fire burning on the sea, and snow (in April) on the summit of its mountains, whose mass is bigger than the entire Sierra Nevada range, I saw, on my one long day's drive right around the island, orchid nurseries and coffee plantations, orchards of macadamia nuts and fields of sugar cane. I saw real cowboys on the biggest family-owned ranch in the world, the 224,000-acre Parker spread where 50,000 head of cattle not so much graze as seem to picnic on the superb Capability Brown-type parkland scenery. I swam from a jet-black beach, saw the ruins of an ancient royal temple with a sacrificial altar and, in the time-forgotton town of Hilo, parking meters where you park a pick-up or tie up your horse.
My favourite spot of all was the incredible Waipio Valley, a sheer-sided 

*
1996
The New Greek Island

The Santorini region has since become a popular resort, because the volcano is inactive and there is the chance to peer into the defunct craters.
THE NEW GREEK ISLAND
(From our Athens correspondent)
A new island began to rise above the level of the sea in the Bay of Thera (Santorin) on the 4th inst, and in five days it attained the height of from 130ft to 150ft, with a length of upwards of 350ft and a breadth of 100ft. It continues to increase, and consists of a rusty black metallic larva, very heavy, and resembling half-melted scoria that has boiled up from a furnace.
The present eruption commenced on January 31. A noise like volleys of artillery was heard, but without any earthquake. On the following day flames issued from the sea, in a part of the bay called Bulkanos, where the water is always discoloured and impregnated with sulphur from abundant springs at the bottom. The flames rose at intervals to the height of 15ft, and were seen at times to issue from the southwestern part of Nea Kaimene. That island was soon rent by a deep fissure and the southern part sank considerably. On February 4 the eruptions became more violent. Gas forced itself up from the depths with terrific noise, resembling the bursting of a steam boiler; flames arose at intervals, and white smoke formed an immense column, crowned with a curled capital of dark heavy clouds. The new island was visible next morning, increasing sensibly to the eye as it rose out of the sea at no great distance.

*
1996
Volcano dates biblical history
Steve Connor, Science Correspondent
TWO CAMBRIDGE professors have come up with scientific data that they claim pinpoints the exact time when Joseph, the Old Testament figure renowned for his coat of many colours and for predicting a seven-year famine in Egypt, was alive. If they are right, many key episodes in biblical history, including the exodus of Jews to the Promised Land, can be dated precisely for the first time.
The key to their theory is the volcanic eruption of the Greek island of Santorini, in 1628BC. Colin Humphreys, professor of materials science, and Robert White, professor of geophysics, claim that the explosion which ejected enough rubble and dust into the sky to fill the Channel tunnel more than 4,000 times led to an unprecedented seven-year famine around the Nile's fertile region.
The volcano threw up to 192m tons of sulphur over an area extending from present-day Turkey to the Nile. This fell as acid rain. With climate cooling caused by atmospheric dust, this would have caused crops to fail for several years, Humphreys said.
This was the famine that the Israelite Joseph forecast when he interpreted a pharaoh's dream, foretelling seven years of plenty followed by seven years of famine.
Until now biblical scholars believed that Joseph could have lived at any time between 1900BC and 1350BC, a span of more than 500 years, which has led to doubts over other biblical dates. If it can be proved that he lived in the 17th century BC, that suggests the pharaoh reigning at the time was Khyan, the greatest of the six pharaohs of the Hyksos dynasty, the scientists said.
Because Khyan took Joseph's advice and stored grain during the good years, he became very powerful, said Humphreys. "It fits in with Khyan being so famous. He had a huge influence that extended from Crete to Baghdad."
More significantly, having established Joseph's dates, all other subsequent biblical events can be slotted into place. In particular, the exodus of Moses from Egypt to the Promised land can be pinpointed as 1280BC, the same year that Rameses the Great was building the temple of Abu Simbel.
A similar controversy exists over the chronology of key events in Egyptian history. Leading Egyptologists have greeted the Cambridge findings with caution. Professor Kenneth Kitchen, of Liverpool University, said other attempts to link Egyptian dates with biblical events were also beginning to provide some interesting coincidental dates, "but it's not absolutely guaranteed. We don't know enough to endorse it fully or to fault it, but it's an interesting possibility".
Other specialists, such as David Rohl, author of the bestselling book A Test of Time, dismissed the Cambridge work.
"They are on to a loser," he said. "It just doesn't fit with recent finds in Egypt. It is science versus archeology and a big schism is developing between the two over dates."

*
1996
Rough Diamonds
Robert Elms
It is wild, empty, unpredictable and awesome but, says ROBERT ELMS, it is the power of its natural world that is Iceland's jewel.
At first you just see grey. A lank sky sodden with cloud, lashed by rain swirling over a soil that is not soil at all but ash, spiteful shards of volcanic afterbirth forming an unstable, crunchy mat beneath your feet, a dusty near-black blanket that is whipped up by the swirl to add to the gloomy air of enveloping monotone. This feels like the end of the world. But then, as you grow accustomed to the light and the wind and the rain, you begin to see shades emerging; a vague, hazy, mossy green wrapped around clumps of ash that have solidified into something like rock. A glimmer of blinding white in the far, far distance, a glacial gleam piercing the sky. Then, causing a joy far in excess of its size, a tiny sprig of wild flowers purple and brilliant, proof of life. And then you see the steam, a fierce jet of vaporised water pouring not from the sky but the ground, a startling, shocking eruption from the very belly of this strange earth. This is not the end of the world but the beginning.
The Reykjanes peninsula on the southwest corner of Iceland is one of the most inhospitable and dramatically bleak parts of this island at the limit of the habitable world. It is also where you first land. Keflavik airport is on the coast of this scarred, volcanic wasteland, and visitors are siphoned hurriedly onto coaches and rushed off to Reykjavik and the many more voluptuous natural wonders that lie ahead. But this dark and foreboding area, with its sporadic outbursts of primeval power and tenuous, often touching signs of life, is among the most moving and magnetic. The most potent images Iceland provides are of nature born anew, and nowhere is that more tangible than here in this great grey place. You must return.
First, though, you have to get to know the charming and wayward little capital. With 100, 000 or so souls, almost half the population of this eerily empty land, Reykjavik is a peculiar combination of the rustic and the sophisticated. Everywhere neat boxy houses with brightly coloured corrugated iron roofs give the city the squat, haphazard appearance of an unfinished frontier town. Yet it's blessed with a couple of good hotels, a few excellent restaurants and bars, and a surprisingly hectic social and cultural life, all of which make Reykjavik a fine place to base yourself. The hardiest travellers forsake its softened pleasures for the tough stuff that lies out there in the wilderness. You see them, solitary figures on long lonely roads, riding bicycles burdened with their worldly goods or walking, cowering under the weight of erupting rucksacks. The locals shake their heads and drive past in their huge-wheeled four-wheel drives. Unless you're a fanatic, base yourself in the capital and plan your forays from there.
Every region of this island, ejected into the Atlantic from the unstable chasm between two continents, has wonders to make a geography teacher weep. The southeast has natural spas and lakes, woods and the largest glacier hovering behind it. The northwest, intensely rugged, indented by filigree fjords and small isolated communities, possesses a tugging, verdant beauty unknown elsewhere. The northeast boasts the volcanic drama of lake Myvatn, right over the mid-Atlantic ridge, with surreal landscapes and vivid mineral hues. There's also Akureyri, a relatively sunny, pleasant town of 15,000 people, which makes it the second largest metropolis on the island and the only real alternative base. Finally, there's the daunting, impenetrable subarctic desert of the interior. Roadless, endless, uninhabited and uninhabitable, a true heart of darkness that draws mountaineers and madmen. For most, though, the southwest is sufficient. There's enough here, in the lap of the Icelandic culture, its spiritual epicentre, to call you back time and again. The story goes that it was to stop unwanted visitors coming here in the first place that the original Viking settlers called this relatively green island Iceland, while truly icy Greenland was so named as a false lure. Today they just make everything extraordinarily expensive. As a result, most tourists opt to explore in guided groups, being bused from geyser to waterfall, lake to glacier. If you can break the bank, though, and hire a car for at least a couple of days, you get a chance to wander at your own pace, stop to marvel at the extra-ordinary solitude, to revel in the occasional, almost overpowering sense that you might just be the first person to have trodden here in many northern summers. Driving is feasible because the road network in the southwest is decent and because Reykjavik is so small that you can be out there communing with nature at its most effusive within 20 minutes of downing a £6 beer in a designer bar. Those who really wish to go off the beaten track have to take precautions because, although Iceland may not be especially icy, it is extremely volatile. Weather can change suddenly, terrain turn from the dramatic to the dangerous, and help, in a land with only two people per square mile, is often very distant. But then the stuff within safe and easy reach is so spectacular that you don't need to take risks. Just take any road out of Reykjavik.
Within a day trip's circumference of the capital there's an area known cornily as the golden circle. This is an array of natural wonders, something of a geological freak show, but it's a show that has to be seen. And as you move from one famous phenomenon to the next you start to feel an almost elemental sense of this unique land and the equally singular souls who inhabit it. Nowhere is that relationship between man and nature more graphically entwined than in the blood- and saga-soaked valley of Thingvellir.
This lush amphitheatre, a gorge divided by a tumbling, serpentine river, bounded by Iceland's largest lake, snow-peaked volcanoes and a vast natural granite wall, is one of the most conventionally beautiful spots in the country, but its scenic serenity is deceptive. Ever since the first settlers banded together in the 10th century, this place, its name meaning "parliament plains", has been the arena for settling disputes. At best this was a rudimentary form of democracy that attracted wise men from all over the island. But when the Norse gods were frowning, so blood boiled and flowed like the violent geothermal waters that spurt nearby. Nowhere is the Viking past and its haunting poetry as vivid as at Thingvellir. The single Icelandic standard blowing in the inevitable wind, planted there with independence in 1944, brings that history up to date. This is a mighty place.
As you travel from it towards the geyser that has given all such fountains their name, you begin to realise just how forceful the few Icelanders are. Anywhere there's a swathe of land stable and fertile enough to support some sheep and a small, hardy horse, you will see a solitary farmhouse. Anywhere there's a couple of farmhouses, the simple spire of a little Lutheran church will pierce the unbroken skyline. Life out here, even with the four-wheel drives and the relative affluence of modern times, is tough, silent and stern. The traveller can expect few luxuries en route. Where anything like a village exists, it is likely to be spare, almost spartan. This is not a land of cosy hotels and roadside inns. Stop at the famed spa at Laugarvatn, where scalding steam fringes a freezing lake, and the facilities consist of an old wooden hut. Despite this and the usual driving rain, Icelanders come regularly to shed their clothes and immerse themselves in these dread extremes. This is not Provence.
But when the enveloping blanket of cloud lifts and the sun shines, things start to look very different. Suddenly the horizon extends to an almost supernatural degree, and vast vistas reveal themselves, always with a looming volcano or two hovering on the pale horizon. The absolute lack of pollution gives both the air and the light now pouring through it a sharpness, a biting clarity that is startling. The colours of summer mauve-green mossy grasses, pink, blue, purple and yellow wild flowers, endless blue skies and an orange ball sun leap out at you. Nature seems almost benign, but then you haven't seen what it can do yet.
The Great Geyser, Iceland's most famous geological phenomenon with its 600ft spume, is not the old faithful it once was. But in the rich red and ochre-stained lava fields all around it, the very floor you walk along bubbles and boils with a frantic, fetid energy that seems almost diabolical. A smaller but more reliable geyser gives forth every few minutes, erupting 80ft from a swelling pool that expands and explodes in front of your eyes. The whole place is moving, both literally and emotionally, disquieting, humbling and uplifting like, perhaps, being present at birth.
The road to and from the geyser, one of the few that reaches for any distance into the interior, has just six miles still to go. It peters out as a Tarmac path in a nondescript car park with a simple hut that gives you no
END indication of the powerhouse round the bend. You hear it before you see it, an unfathomable roar that seems to emanate from the air itself. Then you spot a high watery mist, which, in this capricious country, could be a geyser or a steam vent. It isn't; it's a waterfall. You also feel it before you see it, a fine soaking spray carried on the wind and a rumble beneath your feet, like some kind of quake. As you finally reach the awesome end, you see the gully that carries the torrent, then your eyes know what every other sense has already anticipated: Gullfoss, the Golden Falls. The river Hvita, leaping and diving more than 100ft, twisting as it drops into a ravine more than a mile wide. The greatest falls in our continent just feet away, and if you're lucky you may just be the only soul present.
Gullfoss is a glorious thing, untainted and raw, worth many drenching, deafening minutes in its presence but, before you head back for the thankfully sophisticated pleasures of the city, there's one more wonder to gaze upon. If the northern deities have smiled upon you, the sun will still be out and the view still clear. For if it is, due north you will see the source of this immense power. Nestling between jagged peaks of black rock sits Langjokull, a prehistoric monster, the alter ego of the dragon, breathing ice over its bleak domain. This great glacier, shimmering, tempting like a siren, does, indeed, call some to take of its bitter terrain. For most of us, though, a view of this terrifying, beautiful thing is enough.
Those who wish to experience a glacier usually head onto the Snaefellsnes peninsula, visible from Reykjavik, where the much smaller Snaefellsjokull, Arne Saknussemm's entry point in Journey to the Centre of the Earth, offers a relatively easy introduction to the frozen world. Perhaps, though, the time has come to witness another kind of wonder at work. Iceland is essentially one big volcano, but off its southwestern coast sits an archipelago of 13 small islands... well, now there's 13; a few years back there were 12.
The Westman Islands are among the newest places on earth and the most geologically active. Surtsey, the lucky 13th, emerged from the sea over a couple of dramatically documented years in 1963. The largest and only permanently inhabited island, Heimaey, had to be rapidly de-inhabited in 1973, when it erupted with murderous force. You can fly the 15
minutes to Heimaey, or take a boat from the coast of that grey peninsula where your journey began. However you get there, it's extraordinary.
When Heimaey exploded suddenly one winter's night, its people fought a heroic battle against the flying fire and the lava flow that threatened to swamp their land. A 500ft wall of molten earth crept towards their town and their precious harbour, and for three months they struggled to survive. They did; just. When you land on their island, you can see the scars, the crushed and half-buried houses, the completely reshaped harbour wall. You can climb Edfel, the 800ft conical hill that now hides one third of their old town. A few yards up, the loose ash starts to get warm to the touch, to smoke and to scorch. You can feel it literally baking within, revealing a thrilling fraction of the power these people took on and tamed. For now. The sense that it could all happen again is almost spooky.
The boat journey back, swarming with seals and sea birds, is also eerie and ethereal and, what's more, it returns you near to that promontory you promised to revisit. All along this coast there are sheer cliffs, surreal rock formations and wonderful black sand beaches battered by the Atlantic waves and giving off an intense air of gothic drama. (The finest of them, at Vik, was recently voted in the top 10 beaches of the world.) But it's inland that the true fascination lies.
Lake Kleifarvatn sits in a huge bowl between sprawling hills of volcanic ash, almost completely barren, near-black and brutally empty in all directions. It's no surprise that this is reputed to be the home of an aquatic monster, a cousin of Nessie, and when you're standing by its lonely shores feeling small and vulnerable, its existence seems much more likely. It's rare to see a human here, even though there's plenty of trout to fish for. You can, though, see those telltale plumes of steam that eventually lead you to Krisuvik.
In this near desert of dark shades, Krisuvik is a hotbed of remarkable colours and occurrences. This is where steam shoots from the ground, where the ground itself seems to be alive, where the process of creation is so real it burns you, showers you, fills your nostrils with its pungent, sulphurous odours. This is the largest steam vent in the world, an entire field of brewing muds in bright, unnameable colours, like some huge chemistry experiment allowed to run wild. Here, close to the airfield that will take you back to your ancient home, you really can witness the world being born.
Robert Elms travelled to Iceland as a guest of Time Off and the Hotel Borg 

*
1996
The collector's collector
Isabel Carlisle
Sometimes, although rarely and unpredictably, an exhibition achieves a dynamism of its own that makes it not just good but great. That this mysterious chemistry should be present in the British Museum's current exhibition on Sir William Hamilton is surprising but palpably true.
I could analyse at length the factors that have brought this about: the infectious enthusiasm of the curators; their appetite for detective work; the high quality of the loans; the lack of inhibitions in mixing ideas with exhibits, science with art; the character of Sir William himself; and an installation that evokes the late 18th century in an entirely unpompous way, are all contributing factors. Much better just to go and experience for yourself this beguiling and stimulating gem of a show.
Sir William Hamilton took up the post of British envoy at the court of the Bourbon King Ferdinand IV of Naples in 1764 without any great ambitions for a diplomatic career. Lacking fortune or title, he concentrated instead on establishing a reputation for himself as a man of "virtu" through collecting art and antiquities, publishing his collections, entertaining the many Grand Tourists and artists passing through Naples and minutely recording the activities of Vesuvius for the Royal Society.
Vesuvius was more active in the second half of the 18th century than at any time since antiquity or afterwards and Sir William was near by for the three violent eruptions of 1767, 1779 and 1794. The evocative scenes that he commissioned from local artists convey the drama of the pall of smoke by day and the glowing orange of the night sky.
Despite the volcano, there can hardly have been a more pleasant place to live: the Bay of Naples was still one of the most beautiful places in Europe. A panoramic view by Giovanni Battista Lusieri, 2.7 metres long and painted from the balcony of Hamilton's Palazzo Sessa, shows it in all its limpid seductiveness, and in such detail that you can pick out Hamilton's seaside retreat, the Villa Emma, on the far side of the bay.
This was also when the first major finds were being brought up from the excavations of Pompeii and Herculaneum. Sir William promptly started his first collection of antiquities. In selling these to the British Museum in 1772 he revolutionised the character of that institution until then a repository of the natural sciences and put it on the path to becoming a showcase for art and antiquities.
The recovery of Hamilton's scattered collections of Greek painted vases, gold jewellery, cameos, gemstones, Old Master and contemporary paintings, bronzes and sculpture is one of the triumphs of the show. The magnificent, colossal head of Hercules, chipped out of the lava at the foot of Vesuvius, is too good to go back into the museum's stores. So is the reconstructed 5 th-century BC Greek tomb from Trebbia, with a bronze cheese-grater among the grave goods and small vases hanging on the back wall. Famously unrecoverable is the part of Sir William's second vase collection, which went down in HMS Colossus in a storm off the Isles of Scilly.
To be remembered as a victim of this disaster and the long-suffering cuckold of the menage a trois with Nelson and his wife, Emma, has been Hamilton's fate until today.
Emma was effectively dumped on Hamilton by his nephew Charles Greville, whose mistress she had been. In tackling the delicate task of establishing a role for her in Neapolitan society, Hamilton had the idea that Emma should pose as classical statues she had already posed for Romney in London. Her metamorphosis from one character into another, with three cashmere shawls for props, became one of the tourist sights of Naples. Among the drawings and paintings of her, including those by Romney and Reynolds, the most enchanting is by Elisabeth Vigee-Le Brun, who sketched her upturned face onto one of the doors at the Villa Emma with a stick of charcoal taken from the fire.
To resurrect Sir William as a benefactor to the nation, a connoisseur and man of taste who aimed to raise standards of design and art in Britain is one of the aims of this exhibition. Most successfully of all, it evokes the enormous excitement of living at the end of the 18th century, when so many branches of knowledge were at their very beginnings and the arts were enthusiastically embracing the discoveries of classical Greece and Rome.
Vases and Volcanoes: Sir William Hamilton and his collection, sponsored by Pirelli, is at the British Museum until July 14.


*
1 July 1997
Fears grow on island after huge eruption
Tom Rhodes in Plymouth, Montserrat
THE biggest volcanic eruption in Montserrat's memory engulfed the tiny island in clouds of ash last night as the British Government promised further aid to relieve the colony from disaster.
Like a giant mushrooming sponge, plumes of white and brown ash from Chances Peak volcano turned the sky black seconds before the residue started to rain down on the north of the island.
Baroness Symons of Vernham Dean, the Foreign Office Minister who toured the Caribbean island for the second time in two weeks yesterday, had just finished her last engagement when the first puffs became visible. She had promised more money for emergency housing and transport, £1.5 million for roads and further funds for a hospital and fuel.
Her message had been that Britain was committed to rebuilding the infrastructure after an eruption last week that claimed the lives of at least 23 people and left the southern two thirds of the island uninhabitable.
"Our absolute priority is the welfare of the people on the island," she said. "I am here today to show that the British Government is committed to Montserrat."
By the time she started for the helicopter that would take her to Barbados the volcano had erupted again.
Carol Osborne, sister-in-law of Bertrand Osborne, the Chief Minister, said as she gazed into the sky: "It's the biggest eruption we have ever had."
Scientists last night predicted further eruptions. The area hit by the most recent waves of lava has been fully evacuated and no human victims were expected. But the renewed activity can only cause further anxiety for the 6,000 islanders who remain and is certain to provoke an exodus which could make the island unsustainable.
The casualties last week, the first since the volcano became active again two years ago, have left a deep impression on the population. Inside the unsafe zone before last night's explosion, Clifford Farrell, a fireman, gazed at the spewing vents of the Soufriere Hills less than a mile away. "That's nothing to what she can do," he said. "If she really blows then we're all dead. It would take less than a minute for the pyroclastic flow to reach this point."
Plymouth, the once thriving capital, is coated in ash so thick that driving through its empty streets is like braving a Saharan sandstorm. Face masks are required to avoid lung damage from inhalation. The noxious smell of sulfur is as pervasive as the sense that this land will not be farmed again for generations. Only the animals remain. Dogs, cats, goats and cows scurry through the ghost town in search of scant food.
*
2 July 1997
Irritable volcano turns an island paradise into hell
Tom Rhodes
Tom Rhodes pays a flying visit to Montserrat, where 23 people died last week amid fears of another Krakatoa.
GEORGE MORRIS, a civilian pilot from Barbados, manoeuvred his Squirrel helicopter around the crater of Montserrat's angry volcano. Below us bubbling vents spurted plumes of dense ash above the British colony, threatening to disable the small machine in a single puff.
This once beautiful Caribbean resort was an awesome spectacle. The villages of Trant's, Harris and Streatham, where as many as 23 islanders had died last week, were completely covered in a light brown carpet of lava and ash. Houses had been gutted by fire. Whole valleys and forests had vanished under thick volcanic mud, the flow stopping 15 yards short of the single-strip runway at Blackburne Airport.
Plymouth, the once proud capital with its brick-red British telephone box and cannon pointing seaward, is barely recognisable. At least five buildings had burnt after a big eruption the previous evening and most Montserratians are convinced the town will never again be habitable.
As the T-shirts that have become de rigueur among islanders put it: "Now she puffs but will she blow? Trust the Lord and pray it's No."
Volcano-watching is the national pastime. There is scant employment and schools have closed to accommodate evacu ees from the south of the island. Along the roads, in the shelters and even at the home of Frank Savage, the inscrutable British Governor, people gaze for hours at a beast none can control. All are tuned to the local radio station which broadcasts hourly updates from the Montserrat Volcano Observatory interspersed with prayer readings and reggae.
Yesterday William Aspinall, British chief scientist at the observatory, was again predicting significant eruptions from Chances Peak.
But vulcanology remains an inexact science and its practitioners are loath to offer any long-term prognosis. While they consistently rebuff the fears of more imaginative islanders that Montserrat could become the next Krakatoa, none is prepared to say with any certainty that it will not.
"There is no blueprint," said Mr Aspinall. "It all depends on what the volcano decides to do. The risk at this time is that overspills could be greater than before but we do not expect the north of the island to be affected." In the past, West Indies volcanoes have tended to explode forcefully for as little as two months.
The experience of the Soufriere Hills in Montserrat has been very different. Since it awoke from centuries of almost undisturbed slumber two years ago, the activity of this volcano has increased by the day.
The fortitude and deep religious commitment of Montserratians is well documented: they have paid a heavy price for living in paradise. First sighted by Christopher Columbus in 1493 and colonised by Irish Catholics 140 years later, the island has endured more than its fair share of tempest and flood. First the cotton industry was ruined, then tourism was crippled.
Hurricane Hugo in 1989 destroyed much of the island and affected 98 per cent of the housing stock, but the people stayed. Since the volcano opened its vents, however, thousands have deserted and, without swift intervention from the British Government and local authorities, it is all but inevitable that another mass exodus will take place.
The crew of HMS Liverpool , the West Indies guardship, was yesterday building additional emergency shelters for those without homes, but the task is unlikely to satisfy many who have lived in makeshift shelters for two years. Nervous breakdowns are increasing, as are reported cases of asthma and respiratory diseases from the ubiquitous ash.
Teenage pregnancies are increasing, too, as young shelter girls turn to prostitution. Father Larry Finnegan, the island's Roman Catholic priest, said family discipline was harder to maintain but he is sure Montserrat will survive. "There is no magic wand for the volcano but we pray that she will go back to sleep."

*
2 August 1997
Volcano stays on the boil
David Adams in Miami
A MONTH after a volcano erupted on the Caribbean island of Montserrat, killing at least ten people, more explosions of super-heated rock and gas have showered the British dependency with ash.
The latest blasts were not as strong as last month's and the authorities said there was no immediate threat of another major eruption. Many of the island's 11,000 residents have left the 39 sq mile island, while many others are living in refugee shelters.
British officials monitoring the Soufriere Hills volcano said a new dome of rock was steadily forming and added that it was impossible to predict when it might blow again. Britain is considering evacuating the 5,000 or so people remaining on the island. About 1,300 have already gone to Britain.

*
2 September 1997
Foulkes pledges start of new era for Montserrat
Tom Rhodes
Tom Rhodes reports on the attempt to mend fences among the Caribbean islanders living in the shadow of a volcano
GEORGE FOULKES, the International Development Minister, accepting government mistakes over its handling of Montserrat, yesterday pledged unequivocal commitment for a new start in the tiny British colony.
In a clear effort at fence-mending during his two-day visit to Montserrat, Mr Foulkes, whose predictions of a cataclysmic eruption by the island's active volcano sparked panic evacuations last month, said that Whitehall and the local government had entered a new era of co-operation."Now it is a new start and we are looking to the future and making an unequivocal commitment to both the people and the island of Montserrat."
Mr Foulkes said that he was looking at immediate needs such as housing, roads, upgrading the hospital and creating employment for the 5,000 islanders who have remained on Montserrat since the Soufriere Hills volcano erupted two years ago for the first time in four centuries.
During his first hours on the island, however, the minister gave no hint of whether further funds might be made available to the beleaguered British outpost in the Caribbean. "We want to ensure the viability of the safe area in the north so that the people of Montserrat can have real choices, given the constraints," he said. "Because the villain of the island is the volcano, and I think we should never forget that."
Mr Foulkes visited the emergency centre, then flew around the fuming volcano crater and made a deliberate visit to the emergency jetty in Little Bay, begun under the former Government and completed after Tony Blair came to power in May.
HMS Liverpool , the West Indies guardship, provided a suitably symbolic backdrop before departing yesterday evening for Puerto Rico, its white ensign flying at half-mast in honour of Diana, Princess of Wales.
In the afternoon, Mr Foulkes, accompanied by Frank Savage, the British Governor, toured various shelters and other areas of Montserrat. He was expected to make a joint statement of intent with David Brandt, the Chief Minister, today.
Over lunch he was presented with plans for a new capital at Little Bay and Carr's Bay, a project designed by Landbase International, a company based in London. The scheme - including plans for businesses, hotels, a hospital and a Test-standard cricket ground - requires an underwriting guarantee by Whitehall.
Mr Brandt, who has been critical of Mr Foulkes in the weeks since the minister's volcano remarks caused widespread panic, yesterday said that he welcomed the new signs of co-operation by London. "We do not want to fight with the British Government, we want to work as partners giving each other mutual respect," he said.
Mr Foulkes's predictions of a terrible eruption, necessitating a complete evacuation, were disputed by scientists last month. The minister's aides said yesterday that he had read from a draft report stating that a "cataclysmic eruption" could not be ruled out. They attempted to blame civil servants for the gaffe.
Islanders are still smarting from subsequent comments made by Clare Short, the International Development Secretary, in which she said that local authorities were demanding too much money and would next be calling for "golden elephants".
So far, £30 million in government aid has been spent in Montserrat with another £11 million promised. Mr Foulkes rejected claims that the Government had been withholding the additional funds.

*
2 October 1997
Attack of the killer cliches
Geoff Brown
NEW MOVIES: Geoff Brown sees a rumoured $100 million go up in flames as LA gets toasted in Volcano
The forces of nature are not treating us kindly. Out in the Pacific, in the real world, El Nino is warming the ocean and turning the world's weather topsy-turvy, stimulating droughts or unleashing torrential rain. Over in Hollywood, Volcano has erupted, spewing fireballs, ash clouds, molten lava and dramatic cliches all over the city. Inside or outside the cinema, there is no escape.
In the old days, it was exciting to contemplate screen devastation. Twenty years ago, when the disaster movie last had its boom, you could enjoy watching fading Hollywood stars getting charred round the edges or burnt to a crisp in The Towering Inferno . You could relish the hokum of an Earthquake , an Airport or a Poseidon Adventure secure in the knowledge that the film-maker, usually Irwin Allen, knew what he was up to: peddling trash.
Volcano is a different matter. The film cost a great deal of money, some say about $100 million, and it was made by people who take their cliches seriously. Fun is drained from the game as a result. It should be bracing watching Tommy Lee Jones wade across chaos, manly and brave. Our muscles should tighten as people scream "Oh, my God!" and the lava envelops buildings, subway tunnels, cars, loved ones and dogs. Or at least we should enjoy a good laugh. But the sheer efficiency and impact of the special effects, as well as the intricate detail of the sets, stop us in our tracks. The effects appear realistic, but everything else is so phoney. How can we remain interested in such threadbare characters, such an absurd and ponderous plot?
True to the genre, the characters come with little personal dramas attached: failed relationships, broken marriages, a problematical 13-year-old daughter (useful for placing in the lava's path). But even Jones's considerable charisma, or the brisk fire of Anne Heche in her mainstream cinema debut, cannot make much headway against the weight of stereotypes.
Jones's character is Mike Roark of LA's Office of Emergency Management, a man never without protective headgear or an ear fused to his mobile phone. Heche is Dr Amy Barnes, a feisty seismologist, the voice of science and moral rectitude. "The city is finally paying for its arrogance," she says, contemplating the hubris involved in building an underground transit system above a centre of seismic activity.
Comments like that bring hints of the real Los Angeles, with its new Metro system, into the film's fantasy. And there are suggestions at times that the director, British expatriate Mick Jackson, intends a satire of contemporary lifestyles, just as he did six years ago in his Steve Martin vehicle, LA Story . He has fun, for instance, at the expense of TV reporters babbling at the disaster's edges.
But it is hard to stay impish when a film lumbers as much as this one, and every curlicue in the script needs to be trimmed to make way for the lava chugging down the streets.
Since volcanoes appear to be in this year - do not forget Dante's Peak , in which an eruption ruined the Pacific Northwest - who knows what Hollywood will think of next. A volcano erupting over a hi-jacked airliner? Impossible, you say. But no more unlikely, surely, than the spectacle of Hollywood remaking a Norwegian black comedy. I will repeat that last phrase. A Norwegian black comedy.
Four years ago Nils Gaup, best known for his Lapland drama Pathfinder , made a little movie called Hodet over vannet , in which a former lover's corpse wreaked havoc on a couple's vacation off the Norwegian coast. Somehow news of Gaup's grim jest reached across the Atlantic. So we now have Head Above Water , featuring Harvey Keitel summering off Maine with the newly ubiquitous Cameron Diaz as his young wife.
Novel origins aside, there is not much here to relish. Black comedy is a tricky art, which the director Jim Wilson has yet to acquire. Over-acting is the norm. Dialogue is punched to the skies. The music strives to be loud and comical, always annoying when nothing comical is happening.

*
3 September 1997
Short seeks to heal rift with volcano island
Tom Rhodes in Montserrat and Philip Webster, Political Editor
CLARE SHORT, the International Development Secretary, made a tacit apology to Montserrat yesterday, agreeing to visit the volcano-ravaged colony within two months to oversee a new long-term plan for the island's development.
The announcement of the visit by George Foulkes, her deputy who ended his own tour of Montserrat yesterday, came after Ms Short's refusal of an invitation by the island's Government and comments in which she accused local leaders of deliberately misrepresenting British offers of help.
Mr Foulkes, who also announced a five-year "sustainable development plan" for Montserrat to be funded by Britain and the European Union, has failed during his trip to apologise publicly for his department's apparent mishandling of policy.
Last month Mr Foulkes, reading from the wrong report by the Montserrat Volcano Observatory, had predicted a "cataclysmic eruption", sparking evacuation panic among islanders. His comments were compounded by Ms Short, who said she was exasperated by the Montserrat Government's "silly political games" and "hysterical scaremongering" in its demands for an improved financial package to help the 5,000 residents who have remained since the Soufriere Hills volcano started to erupt two years ago.
She said the local authorities would next be demanding "golden elephants" from London and, despite an almost empty diary, cited future trips to Bangladesh, Hong Kong and Africa as reasons why she could not undertake a visit to the Caribbean.
Ms Short was then removed from oversight of the Montserrat affair and replaced by a taskforce headed by Robin Cook, the Foreign Secretary. It came as part of government efforts to mend fences with the colony and to salvage the Prime Minister's "caring" foreign policy.
Bernie Grant, MP for Tottenham, who has just returned from Montserrat, saw Ms Short yesterday and voiced his delight at her decision to go to the island. "We all know Clare, we all love Clare. We know she is well-intentioned," he said. He added that he had explained to the islanders that she was a "good person" and had their interests at heart.
However some of Ms Short's ministerial colleagues are still angry about her attack on Whitehall officials and parts of the Foreign Office for criticism of her handling of the affair. In an interview she criticised "vile and dishonest" spin doctors and suggested that there was an attempt to destroy her department.
Fellow ministers have accused her of self-indulgence and naivety for going public with her complaints. Tony Blair might have come under pressure to dismiss her were it not for the death of Diana, Princess of Wales.
In Montserrat, Mr Foulkes and David Brandt, the island's Chief Minister, signed a joint declaration that would ensure healthcare, education, utilities as well as internal and external communications for all who wished to remain in the island.
For those on Montserrat who want to leave, the British Government will provide an initial right of unrestricted entry to the United Kingdom for two years. It will allow the islanders access to income support, housing benefit, schooling and healthcare. Transport costs to Britain will be included.
A separate financial package will be made available to those who prefer to stay. Work on a remaining batch of 200 homes to be built will continue. Mr Foulkes declined to be specific about costs, but said the scheme would amount to much more than the £41 million spent or put aside for Montserrat.

*
4 February 1997
Fall in love with the heart of Java
Rebecca Mobray
Rebecca Mobray experiences the timeless culture and natural splendours on magical Yogyakarta.
IF YOUR vacation plans afford you only one destination in Java, it should be Yogyakarta, a one-step cultural infusion that can be sampled in a three-day drive-by, or savoured in a month-long meditation.
Yogya, as it is abbreviated, is a national treasure, the heart of Java, common cultural property in a land of diversity. "Ah, Yogya...," Indonesians respond upon hearing this mystical word.
Not surprisingly, it is also Java's number one tourist destination. But leave behind images of London prices for a peasant's meal or shops full of tourist schlock cheapening Indonesia's national heritage. Yogya's popularity is well deserved: people come to pay homage to the sultan's kingdom, and the kingdom handles the attention gracefully.
Visitors can absorb its cultural offerings on foot or by becak , the traditional tricycle taxi, and also use the city as a base for half-day excursions to Mount Merapi, one of the most active volcanoes in the world, or wander the cool highlands of the Dieng Plateau.
Yogya's designation as the heart of Java also stems from its location in the middle section of the island, in the shadow of Merapi's destructive force to the north, and the Indian Ocean to the south.
At the heart of this centre lies the keraton , or the sultan's palace. Yogya is the only functioning sultanate in Indonesia, and Sultan Hamengkubuwono's home is a 240-year-old city within a city, where 25,000 people reside. The sense of the timelessness of Javanese culture is overwhelming. The palace guards and tour guides wear traditional Yogya pattern sarongs, blue surjan high-collar jackets and blangkes (wrapped hats). Visitors can listen to gamelan concerts and watch the palace's dancers perform classical Yogya dances with graceful precision.
Extending north from the keraton is a two-mile promenade, now Jalan Malioboro, home of Yogya's favourite sport: bargaining. Locally made batik, silver, leather goods, ceramics, wooden sculptures and shadow puppets are all found on Malioboro, where the bargaining starts at a price sometimes two-thirds higher than what you should pay. The tenor of Malioboro is exhausting, but I found the price volleys with street vendors a satisfying interaction that gave me some nice souvenirs.
If you prefer to learn about Indonesian handicrafts by making them yourself, Yogya provides courses for just about any art form. You can also watch silver artisans in Kota Gede, tour the batik factories or design your own handbag with a leather craftsman.
But the most remarkable memories of a Yogya visit will come from the breathtaking Buddhist and Hindu sites outside the city, all of which are best appreciated at sunrise.
Less than an hour's drive from Yogya, is Borobudur, the world's largest Buddhist monument. A seven-level pyramid ringed by Buddhas peering out from shelters resembling giant bells, the entire ensemble is meant to be a prayer wheel. This striking piece of masonry was built by hand between 778 and 850, and was only enjoyed for six years before Hindus overthrew the Buddhist Saliendra princes. One thousand years of volcanic eruptions later, surveyors working under Britain's Lieutenant-Governor, Thomas Stamford Raffles, rediscovered it in 1814.
Only when walking up and up and up the steps of Borobudur does one get a sense of its sheer size. It is eerie climbing this ancient hill of Buddhas, some of which have been decapitated by volcanic rages, or perhaps by warring Javanese tribes. From the uppermost level, I watched the rising sun and marvelled at the gardens below, the volcanoes all around, and simmering Merapi towering over them all.
On the other side of Yogya is Prambanan, the 8th and 10th century Hindu wonder. In contrast to Borobudur's horizontal weight, the lines of Prambanan's three main temples are vertical and light. The network originally included another 244 temples, but all were abandoned in the 13th century when the political power moved to East Java, and were subsequently destroyed by earthquakes. From the fenced-off piles of rubble on the temple site, it is clear that restoration still has a long way to go.
I rented a bicycle and pedalled the ten miles to Prambanan so that I could stop at some of the remaining little temples. Meandering through the rice paddies on the outskirts of Yogya replaced the intensity of Malioboro with a serene peace rarely found in the tourist honeypots. Outside the main temple complex are gardens with benches shaded by trees, making for a pleasant outdoor excursion.
Visitors who come around the time of full moon are treated to special performances of the Ramayana Ballet in the park's outdoor theatre. The dancing is gymnastic, and the costumes vivid against a backdrop of the moon rising over the main temples.
FROM YOGYA, Merapi can be seen sporadically beckoning in the distance. Nocturnal adventurers may want to treat themselves to the lava tour, where you sit on a hill at night and watch red-hot molten rock spill down the side of the mountain. Or you can travel to the safer side of the volcano, hire a guide from the village below, and make the steep, rocky trek by moonlight.
Staring down into a frothing cauldron of lava and seeing the first streaks of day give way to distant volcanic peaks tearing through the morning mist was the most amazing moment I experienced in Java.
Those looking for a more mellow conclusion to their Yogya stay may want to continue on from Borobudur to the Dieng Plateau, where the air is cool and the pace of life practically stationary. You can stroll around the coloured lakes, visit any of the tiny temples scattered across the plain or just drive around and take in the artful terracing of the highlands.
In the opposite direction lies Parangtritis, a dramatic black sand beach with churning surf and barren cliffs - another great spot in which to reflect on the wonders of Java.
READING
FOR anyone visiting Indonesia, the following books are worth reading:
Indonesia Handbook by Joshua Eliot, published by Footprint Handbooks.
Indonesia: From Sabang to Merauke by John Keay, published by Boxtree Ltd.
Lord Jim and Victory by Joseph Conrad published by Penguin.
Island of Indonesia by Violet Clifton, published by Oxford University Press.

*
4 July 1997
Lava louts

Frightening scenes viewed from a sufficient distance inspire a terrible delight, as Edmund Burke observed. While few may choose to wander the flanks of a volcano while it is erupting, seen from afar the spectacle has an undeniable grandeur. It seems to mock man's pretensions and make clear that nature's power is of an altogether different order. Such sights, to Burke, summed up the sublime, though his critics took much pleasure in seeking a precise measure to distinguish sublimity from sheer terror. How far away did one have to be, they inquired, before the quaking legs gave way to aesthetic euphoria?
Had he known, he might have answered that it depended greatly on the type of volcano. Those in Hawaii are as good-tempered as volcanoes know how to be, the steady flow of lava down the mountainside posing few risks and plenty of harmless excitement. Strombolian volcanoes, which hurl out rocks of a consistent size and at a consistent speed, are also relatively benign, though they can sometimes change their tempo and catch out the unwary. The truly dangerous eruptions, such as those in the past week in Montserrat, are composed of a hot cloud of dust and gas which sweeps down the mountain so fast that escape is impossible. In such pyroclastic flows the element of fear far outweighs any possible pleasure, and the damage done to life and property is enormous.
Such destructive eruptions are relatively rare events in relation to human lifespan, far too infrequent to determine settlement patterns. Around the world many great cities lie almost in the shadow of volcanoes that have been dormant so long that their danger is discounted. Often, the fertile soil produced by the volcano actually attracts people to live around it, while expanding populations ensure that the numbers theoretically at risk are higher now than they have ever been in human history. The eruption of Vesuvius in AD79 claimed about 2,000 victims; if it happened again today without warning, it would probably kill 200,000. The island of Java, where a high proportion of the 175,000 deaths that have been caused by volcanic eruptions in the past 200 years have occurred, is four times as densely populated today as it was in 1955.
Many efforts have been made to improve volcano prediction, with some success, but it remains an inexact science. Even when successful predictions are made, as at Mount St Helens in 1980, it is difficult to persuade everybody to believe them and leave the area. Even more is this true of the developing world, where mobility is lower and the credibility of government agencies less. In the past few decades we have been lucky, with only one eruption, at Nevado del Ruiz in Colombia, claiming lives on a massive scale. But it would be unwise to assume that this state of affairs can continue indefinitely. The risks are much greater than is generally acknowledged.

*
4 September 1997
Out from under the volcano
Peter Stothard
THE INSULA OF THE MENANDER AT POMPEII Volume 1 The Structures. By Roger Ling, The Clarendon Press, £85 - ISBN 0 19 813409 6.
Peter Stothard on Pompeii's race against time, tourists and tunnellers.
In the years after Pompeii was buried under the ash of Vesuvius it was not altogether forgotten. Modern tourists who battle their way through dirt and heat to see the town today might be comforted to know that their predecessors were enduring similar discomfort almost from the August day in AD 79 when the town left the map of southern Italy and began its journey into the imagination of the world.
Some of the first people to hack their way through the streets and houses may have themselves been survivors of the eruption or relatives of the dead returning to salvage their lost legacies. Some of the skeletons and human plaster casts, described today as victims caught by the volcano's sudden blast, may have been treasure hunters of late antiquity who underestimated the danger of tunnelling through a slag-heap of pumice. When guides today point out the holes in the walls made by desperate escapers it is always worth wondering whether the route from room to room might have been more appropriate for some gold-getting mediaeval intruder.
In the 16th century came the aqueduct builders; in the 18th, the serious looters for the royal collections of Europe. By the end of the 19th century the scholars were more or less in charge. But the popular appeal of this "time capsule" from the ancient world has produced its own surge of destructive visitors. As Roger Ling describes in his introduction, the great houses of Pompeii are deteriorating even under a regime of the most concentrated and obsessive scholarship. In the single small and much-recorded area (known as insula X) to which he has devoted himself for this book, recent losses have included the ironwork of three houses, a landscape painting, room decorations and a phal lic relief which was last photographed in 1977.
The central building in Ling's study is the Casa del Menandro, the home of a wealthy landowner and wine-maker whose possessions included a striking honey-yellow portrait of the 4th century Athenian playwright, Menander, semi-naked from the waist upwards and reading a book. As well as this picture, which gives the house its modern name, and various others on the eerily appropriate theme of the destruction of Troy, the owners had a fine collection of 118 silver dishes, cups and mirrors which were found earlier this century on a ledge close to the kitchens.
These may have been brought together to be ready for a great escape, possibly by the six adults and three children whose bones were found in a corridor near by. One can almost imagine the mistress's inventory as the departure time drew near: two goblets with doomed gladiator decoration, one bowl showing grief of Ariadne, one jug with head of negro slave, one large cooking plate with animals fleeing the hunt, one cup with oarsman in a tiny boat screaming to the skies.
Thoughts of Pompeii stimulate even the most jaded imaginations. Perhaps the dead were merely the unlucky or the foolish who failed to run when the first egg-sized stones began to hail from the sky. Perhaps the master of the house was caught at the circus games which Bulwer Lytton made the climax of his Victorian best-seller The Last Days of Pompeii . Despite the efforts of Ling and his many fellow scholars, it is unlikely that we will ever know the answers to such conjecture. Nor, however, in an age of mass tourism and many followers of Lytton in both literature and film, are the questions ever likely to stop.
Ling's aim is to submit the Casa del Menandro and its surrounding area to the minutest study and to clarify at least some of the provable truth about one typical part of the town. This is the first of three volumes and covers probably the least seductive part of the enterprise. It is stronger on lime, loam and lava bricks than on paintings, mosaics or silverware. Until the subsequent books appear, those curious about the art of the Casa will have to find copies of Amedeo Maiuri's works, in particular his 1933 monograph, La Casa del Menandro e il suo tesoro di argenteria .
What Ling shows in awesome detail is how the houses were built, how they fitted in with their neighbours, how a big house might spread to take over its block and the impact of subsequent tunnelling of every time and type. Ling likes to spar a little with Maiuri, whose directorship of the excavations lasted from 1924 to 1961 and who made himself the 20th-century emperor of his domain. More scholastic jousting can be expected in the volumes to come.
The modern history of Pompeii has been mostly a story of archaeological progress - from the efforts of the 18th-century Swiss hero, Karl Weber, whose scholarship curbed some of the worst excesses of the Bourbon treasure-hunters, through the domination of the 19th century Italian, Giuseppe Fiorelli, who mapped the area for the first time and invented the technique of making plaster casts from the shapes left by bodies in the ash, to Maiuri himself.
Each generation has aimed to be more precise and scientific than the last. But Ling's generation recognises better than all its predecessors how desperate is the battle against people, time and decay. This book is the beginning of a magnificent publishing project. Without levels of protection and restriction so far unimagined at Pompeii, future scholars may come to value it even more than should we.

*
5 August 1997
London starts talks on volcano island's future
By Michael Binyon, Diplomatic Editor, and David Adams in Miami
BERTRAND OSBORNE, the Chief Minister of the stricken island of Montserrat, yesterday began talks in London on whether the tiny Caribbean island is still viable after two years of devastating volcanic eruptions.
The talks started after eruptions early yesterday morning and on Sunday night sent an avalanche of hot gas, rock and ash pouring down the slopes of the Soufriere Hills volcano into the streets of Plymouth, the abandoned capital.
Mr Osborne, leading a delegation of six ministers and prominent businessmen, will hold talks at the Foreign Office and the Department for International Development as well as the Red Cross, emergency relief officials and some of the hundreds of islanders who have fled to Britain. Tomorrow, the delegation will be received at Buckingham Palace by the Queen.
Britain, which has announced emergency aid and relief amounting to £41 mil lion, yesterday reaffirmed its commitment to Montserrat. "There is no doubt that we are determined that the island - provided it remains viable - should have an economic future," a Foreign Office spokesman said. "The question is how we can help, and what more should be done."
However, after two years of intense volcanic activity, any hope of reoccupying Plymouth is quickly fading. Yesterday plumes of smoke and flame could be seen rising from the town from miles away.
Pebble-sized volcanic debris fell on roofs of some homes in Salem, a central town five miles north of Plymouth, but no damage was reported.
Officials say it was expected that Plymouth would be lost after a large eruption on June 25, which killed at least ten people.
The town had been protected from ash and rock flows by a shallow ravine separating it from the main volcanic activity. But the latest eruption appears to have filled that in, leaving the town exposed. When intermittent eruptions began two years ago, much of Plymouth's infrastructure, including its docks, schools, government buildings and the Governor's residence had to be abandoned. All important public services have since been moved to the north end of the island. The small airport has also been closed, leaving Montserrat accessible only by ferry from nearby Antigua.
Nearly half of the island's 11,000 residents have already fled. Of those who remain, about 1,200 have been forced to seek refuge in overcrowded government shelters.
At the London talks, various options are to be considered, including the permanent relocation of the island's main infrastructure to Salem.
Britain is considering holding a referendum among the remaining inhabitants to find out how many people want to continue living there.

*
6 August 1997
Cook pledges aid to volcano island
Glen Owen and David Adams
Montserrat, where Irish labourers dwelt alongside black slaves and shamrock symbols abound, still looks to Britain, write Glen Owen and David Adams
ROBIN COOK, the Foreign Secretary, promised yesterday to secure the future of Montserrat in the West Indies, which is threatened by increasingly violent volcanic eruptions, as a delegation from the island lobbied the Government for help.
Bertrand Osborne, Chief Minister of Montserrat, took part in the talks as hundreds more islanders fled the previously safe centre of the island when new eruptions rained ash and rocks on them.
Before dawn yesterday the Soufriere Hills volcano erupted again, causing hundreds to flee from nearby villages while the island's abandoned capital continued to burn. The colony's Government had ordered hundreds more people to be evacuated from villages in the west-centre of the island, including the sole remaining hotel, just hours before yesterday's eruption, which continued into the afternoon.
Mr Cook said he had discussed options for Montserrat's future with the delegation of six ministers and businessmen. "The Government will continue to place the highest priority on sustaining and improving the economic and social structure of Montserrat," he said, adding that Britain's intention was to secure a viable future for the island.
Clare Short, the International Development Secretary, who has allocated £41 million in emergency aid for the island, said that, although residents were likely to be given the chance to leave, a full evacuation was unlikely. Some islanders have alleged that there was a "hidden agenda" to abandon the colony. The new efforts will focus on housing schemes in a 15-square-mile zone in the north to relieve pressure on makeshift arrangements.
Montserrat is one of Britain's six remaining Caribbean dependencies. But despite the long association, the island's main cultural identity has more to do with a blend of Irish and African origins. It was first visited by Columbus in 1493 and was colonised by Britain as a sanctuary for victims of religious persecution. In 1632 Irish indentured labourers, whose Catholicism was rejected in the American colonies, were introduced. Soon afterwards the first African slaves were introduced. By the late 1700s they outnumbered whites ten to one.
The shamrock still adorns everything from passports to bars and brochures refer to "the other emerald isle". A popular folk dance, the "heel and toe," is attributed to Irish custom, and the national dish, "goatwater", is said to be traditional Irish stew.
From 1871 to 1956 Montserrat was linked with the neighbouring Leeward Islands. But in 1960 a new Constitution gave the island a partially elected government. Occasional talks have been held since the early 1980s to find ways of giving the 11,000 residents their independence.
The island has had its share of disasters. In 1965 a Pan Am jet rashed into the side of the volcano, killing 34 passengers, and in 1989 Hurricane Hugo ripped homes apart.
Even after two years of volcanic eruptions, most islanders say they want to stay on and remain profoundly loyal to the Crown.
James Reynolds, a local tailor, who returned to his native isle after a 16-year military career spent largely in Scotland, echoes the widespread gratitude on the island for Britain's help. "As far as I'm concerned, without Britain we would be in a terrible state," he said.

*
6 November 1997
Volcano islanders given ultimatum
Michael Binyon
Britain's new Governor of Montserrat has warned residents living in the danger zone that they face fines if they do not evacuate their homes before this evening (Michael Binyon writes). He said the volcano was threatening its biggest eruption yet.
Anthony Abbot said he was determined that the Soufriere Hills volcano, which has claimed 19 lives, should not lead to any more deaths. Anyone found inside the danger zone, covering the southern two-thirds of the island, would be fined the equivalent of about £120. Several islanders insisted they would stay, saying the area was safe and they did not want to move into overcrowded shelters. Richard Luckett, a British seismologist at the island's volcano observatory, denied that there was an imminent danger of a new eruption.

*
8 March 1997
Popping about old Pompeii
Peter Brown
My Italian barber's face erupted into a smile as wide as a comb. "Pompeii?" he said. "Then you must go to Ischia. It is an island with a volcano in the Bay of Naples. It is a paradise."
The next ten minutes were laced with tales of Lachryma Christi (wine), limoncello (liqueur), grapes, peaches, stewed rabbit, sulphur and thermal baths. Suddenly our family holiday, planned as a supplement to the Cambridge Latin Course, Part 1, seemed more enticing. We were headed towards a region still throbbing with volcanic pleasures.
The bus to Vesuvius leaves from Ercolano station and hairpins up the mountain, past prickly pears and vineyards. From the crater rim the view is astonishing. To the right, the sprawl of Naples. In front, the bay, curving left along the hilly Amalfi peninsula, with Capri at its tip, and on the other side Ischia, lost in the mist.
Below, to the left, Pompeii is just a distant blur in the urban network. How could Vesuvius have spat as far as that? With little difficulty - in 1631, its ashes fell on Istanbul.
Revision note: on August 24, AD 79 a mushroom cloud burst from Vesuvius at noon and the sky went dark for days. Pompeii and Herculanaeum, its little neighbour, were obliterated. The Italians are still digging them out.
We started with Herculanaeum, which the children enjoyed, cavorting around the gardens and squirting fountain water. The town was flooded by mud, so the villas and bathhouses still have upper storeys and seem real. You can amble round Herculanaeum in half an hour.
Pompeii, buried under ash and pumice stone, is a vast, roofless maze. Bringing it to life requires an effort, on an August scorcher with your ragazzi begging for ice-cream. Look, look, imagine: the streets, the villas, Beware of the Dog mosaics, cartwheel ruts, casts of the dead, theatres, forums, the temple to Vespasian (sainted emperor who introduced the public lavatory), the big willies (sorry, good luck symbols). On which subject, outside a Roman brothel, I heard a guide putting a group of nuns in the picture: yes ladies, these girls were the price of a glass of wine. The nuns just nodded. Like us, they were trying hard inwardly to digest.
A surprise, on the edge of Pompeii, is the Villa of the Mysteries, where the rich wall-paintings seem like a lost link to the Italian renaissance. We villa-hopped some more, until we felt sufficiently like dead Romans. Then we took the jetfoil to Ischia.
Green and fruitful, Ischia was once the culmination of the Grand Tour. It is bigger than Capri and less glamorous - no Gracie Fields, just Ibsen, William Walton and Alan Clark (it's his favourite foreign place). There are pretty wine-growing villages, and little towns with beaches where men fashion wicker lobster pots and women bellow at sandy children from second-floor windows. No opera could wish for a better set, or chorus.
Dominating the island is Mount Epomeo, dormant but still hissing. Its fumaroles fuelled the Roman showers which you can still use, and on some beaches (look for Marina dei Moronti), you can cook potatoes and eggs in the sand, or scorch your toes in the water.
Epomeo erupted about a century after Pompeii, destroying all life on the island. Then, a century ago, it rose again and killed 3,000, in 15 seconds. Now droves of arthritic Germans throng the thermal hotels, but Ischia absorbs them all, with space to spare.
We stayed in Il Monastero, a hotel converted from a ruined monastery, perched high on a rocky outcrop. Above the hotel stands the ruined Castello Aragonese, at which Nelson took some pot shots. Below, in the crypt, are ranks of stone seats where the corpses of nuns - Poor Clares - were left upright to ruminate upon their maker.
On the hotel's terrace overlooking the bay, we followed their example each evening, inspired by ice-cold limoncello. Ischia proves that Italians can shake off eruptions when they want to; and after a course of Pompeii it makes a perfect summer pudding.
* Il Monastero: 0039 81 992 435 .

*
13 April 1997
7 natural wonders of the world
Mark Hodson
In our occasional series in which travellers share their expertise, seven intrepid explorers describe their favourite places. Interviews by MARK HODSON
SARA WHEELER
Mount Erebus
Sara Wheeler spent seven months in the Antarctic researching her latest travel book, Terra Incognita. Wheeler, who has lived in a Buddhist retreat in Japan, canoed up the Amazon and trav elled extensively in South America, is the first woman to write a book about Antarctica. She describes her trip as a life-changing experience and says the most spectacular sight was Mount Erebus, a 3,000ft active volcano on Ross Island.
"I LIVED in a camp at the bottom of Mount Erebus and I looked at it every day for two months. There was usually a plume of smoke rising from the crater that served as our barometer - we knew what the weather would be like by how much of it we could see and by which way the smoke blew. We were there right on the cusp between winter and summer. It was extremely cold and the landscape was dead; the sky was a strange mixture of cadmium yellow and deep salmon pink.
"Erebus is the Eiffel Tower of the continent - visible hundreds of miles away and a familiar sight to anybody who knows the Antarctic. It can be climbed, but it is very demanding. The air at the top is extremely thin. I once flew over the crater in a helicopter and it looked so odd, this fiery pit billowing forth smoke and surrounded by ice. The pilot turned to me and said,'You're looking at the guts of the earth.' "
Getting there: Mount Erebus can be seen from a cruise ship, but only one with a sufficiently long itinerary. Noble Caledonia (0171-409 0376) says sightings are possible on both its month-long semicircumnavigation of Antarctica on a Russian icebreaker (£8,000 plus flights), and its 22-or 23-day Ross Sea cruises (about £6,000 including flights).
Orient Lines (0171-409 2500) has a 26-day Grand Arctic Circumnavigation including an excursion to Scott's Hut near the base of Mount Erebus. The cruise costs £4,935 and bookings are being taken for January 1999.
When to go: January or February.

*
15 October 1997
Apologetic Short reveals her frustration over Montserrat
Nicholas Watt
Development Secretary tells MPs of confused decision-making, reports Nicholas Watt.
CLARE SHORT, the International Development Secretary, yesterday admitted making mistakes during the crisis over the Montserrat volcano, but laid most of the blame on a "quite dreadful" decision-making process.
Ms Short had infuriated the island's leaders when she said, during a newspaper interview at the height of the crisis in August, that their demands were so unreasonable that "they will be wanting golden elephants next". Asked yesterday by MPs on a Commons select committee about those remarks, she said: "I completely and absolutely regret that it was alleged that I said that ... I was foolish enough to use that startling phrase, which I now regret."
In a two-hour appearance before the International Development Committee, Ms Short said that her response to the disaster had been hampered by the "many players" involved. She said that the Foreign Office had overall responsibility for the island as a dependent territory; her own department was responsible for the island's budget; and the Government of Montserrat ran the island.
Her inability to intervene at the most basic level was illustrated when Andrew Rowe, the Conservative MP for Faversham and Mid Kent, expressed astonishment that no census had been conducted on the island since people had started to leave. Ms Short said: "Thank you, Andrew. Now you understand my frustration."
Mr Rowe asked why, as a last resort, the Royal Navy could not be drafted in to count the population. Ms Short said: "I do not have the authority to do that."
Ms Short told the committee that she had "tried and tried" to have the island's sewers cleaned up, but was powerless to act because the island's Government was responsible. She added that her department could provide vehicles to help, but only the island Government could use them.
An exasperated Ms Short said that handling the crisis "has been an enormously difficult responsibility for me. Part of the problem is the nature of the emergency. But a major part of the problem is that there are so many players in the decision-making, which is quite dreadful."
The volcano on Montserrat erupted in 1995, destroying large parts of the island. It rumbled on until a massive explosion last June in which people were killed. The main town of Plymouth was evacuated and the airport closed.
In August, Britain organised a partial voluntary evacuation of the island, offering £2,500 to each adult to help islanders to move. The Montserrat Government accused Britain of providing inadequate assistance and of scaring islanders after George Foulkes, Ms Short's deputy, gave warning of a "cataclysmic explosion". Montserrat scientists said that he had misinterpreted data.
MPs from the International Development Committee expected to visit Montserrat tomorrow will find that there has been little improvement in living conditions since Britain announced a rescue plan last month. There has been a pronounced increase in volcanic activity, and hundreds of Montserratians have been leaving.
A change in the wind direction has carried the ash over northern parts of the island which had previously been largely unaffected but an eruption powerful enough to affect these areas severely is thought "very unlikely".

*
19 August 1997
Frigate ready to evacuate volcano islanders
By David Adams and Glen Owen
EMERGENCY talks were held in London yesterday, with Britain poised to evacuate the Caribbean island of Montserrat after scientists said it could be wiped out by volcanic eruptions.
At the same time the latest blasts of cinder and ash shook the island for up to 40 minutes, according to a report from the Montserrat Volcano Observatory.
Yesterday's talks were held between government officials and by telephone with Frank Savage, the island's Governor, to arrange a voluntary evacuation this week after scientists detected a new phase in the volcano's cycle of eruptions. Observatory experts reported that "the crisis has entered a stage for which there is little precedent" and there was the chance of a "massive, cataclysmic-intensive eruption".
The Government had said that evacuation of the British dependency was a last resort and placed emphasis on its £41 million aid programme for the north of the island. But yesterday George Foulkes, the International Development Minister, agreed that the report had forced its hand. "Over the past 24 hours the volcano has become much more dangerous," he said. "As a result, we have agreed to the voluntary partial evacuation." The first of the remaining islanders are expected to leave this week.
According to officials in Montserrat, plans are in place and could be executed swiftly. Operation Exodus is centred on the British frigate, HMS Liverpool , which is patrolling near Montserrat. A codeword from the Liverpool would divert merchant shipping in the area to help.
The US Government is also said to have offered troop landing craft to ferry people to the ships. Residents would be brought to an emergency jetty at Little Bay, where they would be housed in a tent city until the ships arrive. Evacuees would then be taken to hotels in Antigua, Guadeloupe and St Kitts-Nevis until a longer-term arrangement could be reached.
More than 4,000 of Montserrat's original 11,000 population remain in the island, most huddled in 12 square miles of shelters in the north. The scientists, emphasising what they call "the potential for explosivity", made clear that those still there are vulnerable to fierce eruptions, saying: "People in the northern zone should seek shelter under a strong roof." About 1,500 people have been forced to seek refuge in overcrowded shelters where they depend on the Government for food coupons and rations of vegetables, tinned beef and rice.
Dr Richard Herd, a vulcanologist in the island, said: "The situation is very serious. Recent eruptions have pointed up that the volcano may be capable of sustaining a very much larger explosion."
As word of the evacuation plan spread, residents packed their bags. Many sought shelter in a partly completed school complex.
The latest developments call into question the island's long-term viability. Ominously, the observatory report says that "lateral surges" of volcanic material are increasingly likely, adding: "It is almost certain they would be lethal to anyone in the way."

*
20 August 1997
Police quell riots as evacuation plan is drawn up for Montserrat
From David Adams in Montserrat and our foreign staff
POLICE with riot shields broke up a demonstration on the island of Montserrat yesterday, dispersing a group protesting about overcrowding in housing for refugees from the island's volcano.
The protesters set up road-blocks and demanded information about the voluntary evacuation assistance package from Britain, said Eugene Skerritt, the permanent secretary to the British colony's Chief Minister.
"The situation in the country is extremely tense," he said. "There is a certain sense of loss. Tempers are getting pretty high."
Some residents who were forced to abandon their homes after new eruptions last weekend have been sleeping in their cars because of overcrowding. But many of the estimated 4,000 people still living on Montserrat say they cannot afford to leave and have nowhere to go.
Clare Short, Britain's International Development Secretary, said yesterday that a voluntary evacuation from the island would go ahead today. "People will be helped to go to Antigua, be received there, looked after, fed and housed and then given choices about their longer term decisions," she said.
They would be given the choice of settling elsewhere in the Caribbean or in Britain. On Saturday Britain offered financial help to all those who wished to leave.
But residents remained uncertain last night. "What we want to know is the package they have for us," said Sean Martin, 26, a fire officer whose family has left the island. "The situation is getting more intense. People don't want to leave their homes in the centre of the island because there's no housing in the north," he said.
"It would be cheaper for the British Government to give everyone a little money, compared to what they are going to spend here if we all stay."
The Soufriere Hills volcano erupted again yesterday, sending up a 10,000ft ash cloud. It was followed by warnings that the island could be threatened by a "cataclysmic" eruption.
The evacuation is being co-ordinated by the Royal Navy warship HMS Liverpool , which anchored off the 39-square-mile island on Monday evening.
British officials insist that despite the safety fears, a forced mass evacuation is not yet necessary, and remains voluntary.
Officials say the evacuation is a precautionary measure, designed in part to relieve the overcrowding. Nearly two-thirds of Montserrat's 11,500 population have already left and most of those remaining are crammed into relief shelters in the last 12-square-mile pocket of habitable land in the north of the island.
Although Montserrat is a British-dependent territory, its residents do not have British citizenship. Immigration restrictions have lately been relaxed to allow Montserratians who can afford the journey to stay in Britain for up to two years.
British and Montserratian officials are reportedly now looking at the construction of a new main town in the north for about 2,500 people, with a minimum infrastructure of essential services.

*
22 August 1997
Island'likely to rise from ashes'
Glen Owen
SCIENTISTS who have studied the record of volcanic islands believe that Montserrat will rise from the ashes of Soufriere Hills.
In 1902, the neighbouring island of Martinique was devastated when Mt Pelee erupted. St Pierre, the town which lived in its shadow, saw its population cut from 28,000 to one - a prisoner held in the town's dungeon.
Within a few years the devastated area was being repopulated, and the tropical rainforest which had been stripped from the hills was thriving afresh. The island, a French departement , now has a population of more than 325,000.
Professor Steven Sparks, the chief scientist at the Montserrat Volcano Observatory, said Montserrat is also likely to revive as soon as the eruptions stop. "We expect the volcano to continue erupting for several years yet, but assuming there is not a catastrophic event, the island is big enough for life to continue in some form in the north," he said. Professor Sparks added that once the volcano had stopped rumbling a lull would be needed while scientists worked out whether it was safe to return to the ash-covered south.
"Life could return even if the whole island ends up being affected. Montserrat shares the same tropical environment as Martinique, and so the vegetation would thrive in the same way. We are already seeing green shoots peeking through the ash on sides of the volcano," he said.
Islanders caught in the path of the volcano's pyroclastic flows would not survive for long. If they manage to avoid inhaling the 700C (1,300F) gas, they are likely to be suffocated under the fast-moving, dense clouds of ash which now blanket the south of the island.
The scientists point to the Canary Islands, where a series of eruptions has left large volcanic deposits - the most recent striking Tenerife in 1909 - without threatening its viability. The islanders have built around the affected areas and offer them as tourist attractions.
"In time, the Montserratians will be able to build on top of the flows," says Richard Luckett, a seismologist on the island. "All of the river valleys in the south have been filled in by the ash, but the climate will just naturally create new ones."
ISLANDS THAT HAVE BEEN ABANDONED
1. 1628 BC Thera, Greece: Island life wiped out by eruption.
2. 1883 Krakatoa, Indonesia: Island destroyed by massive eruption.
3. 1902 Martinque, West Indies: Eruption forces abandonment, gradually reinhabited.
4. 1930 St Kilda, Outer Hebrides: Inhabitants unable to support themselves and are evacuated. Now a nature reserve.
5. Gruinard: People banned after soil infected with Anthrax.
6. Tristan de Cunha: Evacuated after volcanic eruptions. Repopulated in 1963.

*
23 August 1997
Volcano island erupts in protest at exodus plan
David Adams and Michael Evans
David Adams in Montserrat and Michael Evans report on the political fallout in the wake of the British compensation package to move the islanders
A BRITISH-FINANCED plan to evacuate those wishing to leave the volcanic island of Montserrat appeared to be in jeopardy last night as politicians, backed by demonstrators, rejected a resettlement package offered by London.
After Bertrand Osborne, the head of the island Gvernment, resigned on Thursday, local politicians condemned the financial package as "woefully inadequate". As he stepped down, Mr Osborne lashed out at Britain's offer, describing it as totally unacceptable. His successor, David Brandt, a solicitor and independent member of parliament, was sworn in last night and was no less unflattering.
He told protesters: "You, the people, are right. I believe the British are doing everything they can to separate us so that they can do whatever they want." To cheers, he added: "I want you to tell the British that they can take their money and do whatever they want with it." Frank Savage, the British Governor, has appealed for Montserratians to "rally round" in these difficult times.
Mr Savage said he understood that the protests were "a natural expression of people's frustrations - pent up over two years. The final turn of the screw of the volcano has just proved too much for us".
Mr Savage called on demonstrators to keep their protests from going beyond the law. "It sends a wrong signal. It's not our way in Montserrat." He was referring to almost daily street protests this week by Montserratians upset by the way the volcano crisis is being handled by both Britain and the island Government. An angry clash on the streets of Salem on Thursday came the closest so far to bloodshed when a dozen riot police confronted a group of 30 youths shouting anti-British insults. The demonstration turned ugly when Montserrat police beat protesters with batons while detaining four people.
"I don't want to leave Montserrat. I just want a house to live in and some respect," said Joseph Fagan, a local port authority worker and one of the protest leaders. "I have nowhere to go and the refugee shelters are full."
"We would like to stay. All we are asking for is some hope to deal with what we are facing over there," said Stedroy Brade, another protester.
Last night George Foulkes, Minister for International Development, was involved in a clash with one of the chief volcano experts in Montserrat after he was accused by the island's scientists of making misleading statements about the possibility of an imminent "cataclysmic" eruption. Mr Foulkes went on the defensive after a senior scientist monitoring the volcano claimed he had misread a report sent to the Government a week ago.
Stephen Sparks, Professor of Geology at Bristol University and chief scientist in post at the Montserrat volcano observatory, said: "When a government minister dramatises something of this nature, it is a serious matter."
Professor Sparks said the report mentioned the word "cataclysmic" only in a section which examined whether there was any risk of an eruption between 1,000 and 10,000 times bigger than the worst eruption ever seen on the Caribbean island.

*
24 August 1997
Living under the..volcano
Tony Allen-Mills
Tony Allen-Mills sees the fury of Montserrat's volcano but finds that islanders still want to stay and rebuild their lives.
On the way to their hilltop helipad, Steve Sparks and his scientific team were swapping volcano war stories. There were tales of fire and brimstone and flying red hot boulders crashing through flimsy tin roofs. Then Sparks, a geology professor from Bristol University who is now supervising the Montserrat Volcano Observatory, remembered the obstinate American and his villa at Spanish Point.
"He just wouldn't listen to us," Sparks recalled. Scientists had repeatedly warned the American that the 30,000-year-old volcano on the Caribbean paradise island was ready to wreak havoc. There was a strong risk of a lava flow northeast from the crater in the Soufriere Hills towards Spanish Point and the airport. Still the American and his family would not budge.
In June, as the scientists had foreseen, the crater wall collapsed and a torrent of boiling grey pyroclastic sludge hurtled toward Spanish Point at 60mph. Amid choking clouds of toxic gas and dust, it smashed down the forest valley, burst through the American's living room, badly burnt his young daughter - then inexplicably stopped dead in a corridor in the middle of the house.
"Half his house was destroyed, the other half was untouched," mused Sparks, who has spent much of the past two years studying the seismology of Montserrat, first colonised in 1632 and still a dependent territory of Britain. "I suppose you could say he was half right about the accuracy of our warnings."
It was further to refine his ability to gauge the volcano's malevolence that Sparks took off last Friday on a breathtaking helicopter journey around the crater high in the Soufriere Hills. First he donned his orange "hot suit", made of fire-resistant material supposedly able to withstand 300C - just in case the helicopter should crash on hot lava. He briefed a pair of researchers anxious to photo graph the rock falls, craters and spitting superheated gases that provide scientists with a glimpse of the volcano's seismic potential.
Then he ushered me to a spare seat in the rear and told me to hang on to my hat.
THE auguries for such a trip were not promising. A few days earlier, George Foulkes, Britain's minister for international development, had warned that "over the past 24 hours the volcano has become much more dangerous". Earlier this month 10 explosions had sent clouds of poisonous ash billowing to 45,000 feet. In the June blasts 19 people were killed. After two years of intermittent hostility the volcano appeared to be reaching a seismic crescendo.
Now here we were aboard a doorless helicopter, hovering a few feet away from the walls of a shuddering volcano leaking gas at 830C. "Rock falls," Sparks murmured, as a fresh crust of lava cracked and crumbled yards beyond our bucking cabin. Jim McMahon, our Canadian pilot, banked for a closer look at a crater made by a rock that would have made mincemeat of a passing jumbo jet, never mind a five-seater helicopter.
For half an hour we hovered above the blistered lava landscapes around the volcano's cone. The scientists seemed to be suffering from macho helicopter madness. In the back I clung to my seatbelt and prayed to avoid a fiery doom.
Or did Sparks, and the many inhabitants who have remained, understand something about volcanoes and the island that the British government apparently does not?
Spurred into action, the British had implemented a "voluntary evacuation" plan to ensure that the residents of a dying outpost of empire were ushered out of eruption distance as soon as was decently practical. Critics said it was too little, too late, and rows broke out over compensation payments.
Clare Short, the international development secretary, rejected the claims and called the rows "hysterical scaremongering". She argued that help must be given to make the north of the island viable for those who wanted to stay.
It is a view that many on the island support. Last Friday, in the mountainous northern half of the 38-square-mile island, out of range of the volcano's venom, a bulldozer was clearing land for a new shopping mall.
The spectacle was improbable on an island supposedly ready, if not clamouring, for evacuation. Nor were there signs of exodus elsewhere. A mile or so further down the road, a group of islanders calmly played dominoes. Outside a newly built grocery shop, someone had gone to painstaking trouble to hand-paint a sign reading "Bread Chicken Fish Goat Water". Under the volcano, life - Caribbean style - goes on.
Later I visited the registration centre opened by the island government on Thursday to cope with the anticipated flood of applicants for the British government's evacuation package. The flood turned out to be a trickle. On Friday morning there were only four people waiting.
Yesterday, the first day of the planned evacuation, fewer than 25 people were due to leave, though more are expected to follow.
It does not take long in Montserrat to realise that critics have miscalculated in saying the British government has acted hastily in an attempt not to appear negligent in rescuing lava-lashed islanders. The survivors of Montserrat's volcanic firestorms need incentives to stay, not to leave. They seek investment, not evacuation.
Contrary to Foulkes's dramatic warnings, the volcano, though it certainly still has menace, is unlikely to affect areas that have not already been evacuated. Although further eruptions are expected, the worst damage is probably over, according to Sparks.
Many on the island believe the real question the government should be considering is not how to reduce further a population already down to less than 5,000 from a high of more than 11,000. Instead they want to focus additional resources so the island's future can be secured.
"Leave Montserrat?" said Herman Sergeant, an assistant in the chief minister's office. "Not a chance. I've never given it a thought. I want to be here when the north is being developed. I love my country very much and I want to be here when the volcano is gone."
Just over a century ago, an Irish sailor named John Chalmers stepped ashore in Montserrat and found himself an African wife. Four generations later his great-grandson, Joseph, is the man building the new shopping centre. Chalmers has already been forced to move his retail businesses twice. The handsome two-storey shop he built in 1995 in the island's main town, Plymouth, has been swept away by lava. He moved what goods he could salvage to new premises in Salem; then, after the June eruptions, he had to evacuate again, further north.
Undeterred by his losses, he remains convinced that Montserrat is a viable community. He is more concerned that the British will eventually offer an attractive enough evacuation package to entice people to leave, even though they may still have jobs and habitable homes on the island. "We can't afford to lose people like that," he said.
Chalmers has carefully followed the reports of Sparks and his observatory team and has become confident enough to persuade his London-based brother-in-law to invest land in his shopping project.
"Of course families abroad don't want to hear you say you're ready to stay. They want you to get out as quickly as possible, but there's more to it than that. You can't just walk away," he said.
Outside the secondary school, where officials twiddled their thumbs as they waited for would-be refugees to register for evacuation, Pat Ryan was in little doubt about the best bet for Montserrat's future. "They have to develop the north," she said.
It was Ryan's job to hand out green sheets of instructions to people waiting, but evacuees were "just a trickle, really", she said. She does not intend to go voluntarily. "I would leave with a very, very heavy heart," she said. "I wouldn't leave unless they told me I had to."
It proved a familiar refrain. The only islander I spoke to who intended to accept Whitehall's offer of a free ticket to London was Maria Davis, who introduced herself as "Mystical Vibratical Bee, the famous calypso dancer". She seemed to be under the impression that the government's offer amounted to the chance of a free holiday in London. "That's the mother country," she said. "We have to leave but we'll be back when we can."
FALLOUT from the volcano, however, still threatens to land on Britain. Despite already spending £40m on the island, it will come under pressure to provide further assistance.
On Friday David Brandt, a hard-nosed commercial lawyer, succeeded Bertrand Osborne as the island's chief minister. The circumstances of Osborne's sudden resignation remain murky, but Brandt is widely perceived as an aggressive maverick who will prove less compliant than Osborne in negotiations with British officials. He will fight for more money to keep the island viable.
While Chalmers, Brandt and other prominent islanders profess confidence that Montserrat can be saved, the task is daunting. The island has lost its airport, its biggest town, its hospital, most of its agriculture, almost all its light industry and an estimated four-fifths of its infrastructure. Its once-buoyant tourist industry is dead.
The devastation is shocking, but scientists on the edge of the evacuation zone last week said there may be no physical bar to continuing life on Montserrat. At the observatory's displaced headquarters in a borrowed villa overlooking the Soufriere Hills, Dr Tim Druitt, a British geologist, explained the mechanics of volcanic menace. According to recent seismic measurements, he said, the volcano still had the potential "for doing something a bit nastier than it has done in the past". The pyroclastic flow may eventually swallow the beautiful Belham River valley and the island's 11-hole golf course. "But the present evacuation limits will cope with that," he said.
There remains a theoretical chance of an explosive increase in seismic violence - perhaps expelling lava with hurricane force towards the centre of the island - but Druitt and Sparks made it clear that they had seen no evidence to suggest such a disaster.
From above the volcano, two scenes unfold: on one side, brutal grey lava rivers have spilt across ashen hillsides, leaving desert and ruin; on the other, unspoilt jungle meanders across the hills to the sea. On the south side lay the skeletons of villages, bleached by volcanic dust. But to the north still lies the promise of life.
*
27 February 1997
Popocatepetl volcano

plume of ash and steam rises from Popocatepetl volcano, 55 miles southeast of Mexico City, in what officials dismissed as a harmless display of activity.
*
27 August 1997
Pledge of aid brings hope to Montserrat
David Adams in Plymouth, Montserrat
JAMAICA'S Prime Minister has promised residents of Montserrat that he will lead a new international effort to restore the "idyllic" island to its "pristine glory".
P.J. Patterson told them, on a brief visit to the island, that he is "absolutely convinced" the northern third of the island remains safe from the volcano.
Yesterday, presiding over a meeting of Caribbean Community (Caricom) leaders in Antigua discussing ways to accelerate Montserrat's recovery, Mr Patterson criticised Britain for not moving fast enough to rebuild in the north. He labelled London's response to the volcano crisis as a lesson in "how not to respond to a disaster of this nature".
Caricom and Britain recently began work on two housing projects in the north for about 80 homes. But Britain has halted funds for a further 200 homes.
The strong lead taken by Mr Patterson has brought new hope to many Montserratians. "For the first time the Government and the people of Montserrat are seeing that someone has faith in them - that someone is there for them in their time of need," David Brandt, the island's Chief Minister, said.
Up the narrow, winding road to the summit of Garibaldi Hill outside Plymouth, holiday villas with names like Panorama, Trelawny and Island View lie empty. Goats run wild and cows graze by the side of the road.
Sandwiched between the volcano and a turquoise sea, Plymouth has taken on the appearance of a ski slope after an avalanche of volcanic material buried the city in rock and ash last month.
Scientists monitoring the volcano say they have detected "escalating" activity in recent days with ash vents and minor pyroclastic flows of super-heated gases and rock which cascade down the flanks of the crater.
"Collapse of material from the (lava) dome may lead to further explosions and these may be more intense and longer lived than those already experienced," the Montserrat Volcano Observatory reported yesterday.
Since the volcano first erupted in July 1995, thousands of Montserratians have been forced to abandon their homes. More than half of the island's 11,000 residents have gone abroad. Many of those who remain now live in crowded refugee shelters.
At the weekend Britain began a voluntary evacuation of the island, but many residents say they are determined to stay, and only 22 people have so far boarded the evacuation ferries. According to scientists, the volcano's dome now measures about 75 to 80 million cubic metres, and is growing by up to six square metres, about the size of six fridges, a second.
"There are some very precarious parts of the dome. There's an enormous amount of it sitting above the valley leading to Plymouth," said Dr Stephen Sparks, the Bristol university vulcanologist who now heads the team of eight scientists at the observatory. But Dr Sparks said the north is relatively safe. Even in the unlikely event of an eruption ten times the size of the most violent so far, there would probably be little threat to lives or property in the north.

*
28 June 1997
Volcano claims more victims

BRITAIN has sent four helicopters, including one specially equipped to treat burns, to Montserrat where at least nine people have died in a volcanic eruption, the Government said yesterday.
George Foulkes, Minister at the Department of International Development, said Britain was ready to send further aid to the British dependent territory, which is bracing itself for another imminent eruption. The dead were the first victims of the Caribbean island's Soufriere Hills volcano since it roared back to life almost two years ago after lying dormant for nearly 400 years.
Three bodies were found yesterday, leaving about 14 people unaccounted for in an evacuated "danger zone".

*
29 June 1997
British warship goes to aid of volcano island
By James Anderson Carr's Bay, Montserrat
A BRITISH warship was expected to arrive off the Caribbean island of Montserrat last night to help with disaster relief in the aftermath of a lethal volcanic eruption in the British dependent territory.
Ten people have been killed as a surge of ultra-hot rocks and gas have burnt through seven villages, burying victims under smouldering debris.
The casualty list is expected to be higher as 15 people were still missing yesterday. One of the first tasks of the crew aboard the HMS Liverpool will be to dispatch its Lynx helicopter on search-and-rescue missions to try to find victims who may still be trapped in the wreckage of their homes.
Five burn victims were airlifted from Montserrat to the French islands of Guadeloupe and Martinique for treatment. Scientists have warned that another eruption could be imminent.
"Further pyroclastic flow activity is expected, and the high level of activity means that these flows could happen at any time - and may be of significant size," said the team monitoring the volcano.
The Liverpool and its auxiliary ship, the Black Rover, which is due to arrive later today, were sent in by Fleet Headquarters after a request from Frank Savage, the island's governor. Last week crewmen from a Dutch navy ship helped search for victims and a French air force helicopter helped in evacuations.
Part of the giant dome of volcanic material inside the Soufriere Hills volcano collapsed last Wednesday, dousing much of Monserrat with ash and sending a rain of superheated gases, ash and rock - hot enough to melt steel girders - towards the east of the island, trapping villagers in its path.
The flow levelled most of seven villages, destroyed an estimated 175 homes and forced the closure of the island's only airport.
In the early hours of Friday agonised wails punctuated the sombre calm of the seaside cemetery in Carr's Bay as mourners gathered to bury four victims of the deadly explosion.
But even as the victims were being buried, hundreds of people ignored government appeals to evacuate an area made precarious by two small eruptions the same day and returned to tend their plots of cabbages, potatoes and carrots along the volcano's once verdant slopes.
Last week's eruption was the first fatal incident since the volcano burst into life two years ago after being dormant for 400 years. Almost half of the island's original 11,000 residents have fled to neighbouring islands from the volcano.

*
30 March 1997
Brosnan vs the volcano
Tom Shone
No contest. Our man barely manages a smoulder when Dante's Peak explodes.
No, Dante's Peak (12) is not a film about the creative highs of the Italian poet, although its images of fire and brimstone would slot in neatly somewhere between the Inferno's sixth and seventh circles of hell. It is instead a creative low-point in a career already well-slung with lows: Brosnan's Trough. Pierce Brosnan plays a volcano expert called Dr Dalton - which is mean, though not as mean, admittedly, as calling him Dr Connery - who is trying to convince a small town that the mountain in their backyard is about to blow its top, and to convince his fellow actors that he is capable of something similar. "It's not extinct," warns Brosnan, "just dormant." He should know.
Was Brosnan really the best they could come up with? Didn't they want someone big and bold and built like a boulder? I've always gone on the theory that, as with romantic comedy, action heroes should suit their nemesis in some way, however inanimate those nemeses are these days - natural disasters such as tornadoes and volcanoes having long since put old-fashioned human villains out to pasture. But if you are going to have a film whose villain is a cliff-face, then yes, Sylvester Stallone is your man - his muscles in Cliffhanger offering as reliable a relief map to the surrounding terrain as could be had. Or Bruce Willis, cast opposite a building in Die Hard - a great match, never bettered.
But Brosnan vs a volcano? Watching him amid a stampede in the town hall - "Don't push, don't push," he cries - he seems too svelte a presence to survive a dinner queue, let alone a stampede. Okay, so he gets to bare his chest a lot and, at one point, stares fiercely at a rock - which is much more his level of opponent: "A man who stares at rocks must have a lot on his mind," says Linda Hamilton, encouragingly - but I know who my money's on, and so do the producers, who spent several zillion times more money on their rocks than on their actors. "This town might just be worth saving," says one of Brosnan's volcano boffins, having tasted the local coffee. Then again, it might just be worth seeing it repeatedly razed to the ground with enough force to level 10 cities.
Just. The effects are the usual blast - rocks falling like meteorites, ash turning the air to blackened soup, floods smashing whole streets to matchwood. You'd have thought the plot would have been fairly simple, running somewhere along the lines of, well, running. But that's reckoning without the first rule - Lemming's Law - of films such as these, which dictates that up the mountain goes Brosnan to retrieve Hamilton, who has gone to retrieve her children, who have, in turn gone up the mountain to retrieve granny, who simply wants to stick around and look at old photos. Frankly, burning to death in a lake of acid was too good for the woman.
As with all the recent disaster movies, the disaster dwarfs the movie, the special effects laying on such a wave of devastation that the only things the characters can do is sit tight until it has all blown over - an outright cheat. Brosnan, holed up in his car, hemmed in by boulders, and buried deep underground, simply presses a button and waits to be rescued. I could do that.

*
30 June 1997
Volcano islanders fear new eruption as toll rises to 23
Tom Rhodes in Salem, Montserrat
AS MANY as 23 islanders were last night feared dead on the British colony of Montserrat as scientists predicted another big eruption from the heart of its volcano.
Chances Peak in the Soufriere Hills to the south had claimed at least eight victims after it spewed molten lava over the island last week. Authorities say up to another 15 are missing, presumed dead.
Frank Hooper, the island's police commissioner, said 24 people had been airlifted to safety and five were being treated for serious burns at hospitals in Guadeloupe and Martinique. "This is by far the worst eruption we have seen," said Mr Hooper, a chief superintendent with the Sussex police, on secondment. "It's going up every eight hours at the moment."
Frank Savage, Montserrat's Governor, issued a warning to Whitehall that a mass exodus from the island could sound the death knell for the once-beautiful Caribbean resort. At least 6,000 inhabitants remain but the Governor says that 1,000 may leave in the next week. He said the island could not be sustained by fewer than 4,000 people.
A big eruption last week claimed the volcano's first casualties since its current cycle started in 1995. Lava tumbled down the hillside within minutes, consuming everything in its path and leaving a dense grey ash covering of the island. Lost in the dark fog of the eruption, the victims had no hope of survival and rescue teams believe some bodies will never be recovered.
Most of the dead were farmers and their wives, tending to crops and cattle on the mountain. Others, such as Keithly Laponde, 36, had entered the danger zone to try to save animals.
Scientists monitoring the build-up inside the dome of the volcano are convinced that another big explosion could soon engulf Montserrat's capital, Plymouth. Apart from a few stalwarts, the town has been evacuated but it remains the centre of the island's infrastructure.
Mr Savage has watched the dependency deteriorate gradually. The Government has already spent $10.5 million (£6.5 million) in disaster aid and projects worth $50 million are promised. Baroness Symons, the Foreign Office Min ister, was due to arrive last night to make another assessment of the damage.
The omens are not good. Lava has almost reached the airport and has come within 300 yards of the school in Cork Hill, an area previously deemed safe.
An evacuation of the 1,500 population was under way yesterday but many islanders are unwilling to leave the homes they have worked so hard to sustain.
Two thirds of the housing on the island and three quarters of the infrastructure have already been lost. The airport and the port are closed.
"Montserrat is only sustainable provided the volcano does not get much bigger or too much more active," said the Governor before attending a prayer service yesterday. "The north of the island is probably safe but it is not hospitable."
He added: "There comes a point where the people will look for an alternative if the local authorities and the British Government cannot improve conditions. We have got to cut through the red tape or they will go to the United Kingdom or other Caribbean islands."
HMS Liverpool, the West Indies guardship, arrived yesterday with 250 members of the Royal Navy on board. The ship's Lynx helicopters joined a team of two other helicopters conducting search and rescue missions.

*
30 August 1997
Volcano havoc could last years, scientists say
By Nigel Hawkes, Science Editor
THE eruption of the Soufriere volcano on Montserrat could continue for years, scientists who are monitoring the volcano believe.
Previous eruptions of the same type on the Caribbean island have lasted about five years, said Dr Willie Aspinall, a British expert who has recently returned from working at the Volcano Observatory on the island.
"So far the volume of material extruded from the volcano - about 100 million cubic metres - is less than half and probably only about a quarter of what we can infer from previous eruptions," he said. "That means that another three to four years of eruption would not be a surprise."
The team of scientists cannot rule out an even longer timescale, as some lava dome eruptions of the same type develop into activity lasting for up to 50 years. But in spite of remarks made by George Foulkes, the International Development Minister, a catastrophic explosion is the least likely of scenarios painted by scientists.
They described this as a "remote possibility" whose probability of occurrence, though never precluded, is extremely low. "The best estimates for such an event is one in 10,000, although some scientists see it as negligible," the team concluded.
The most likely outcome, they believe, is a continuation of the present eruption at about the same intensity. That is little consolation for the islanders as the eruption has claimed the southern half of the island, where most of the facilities are.
Yesterday the observatory, manned by a rotating group of eight to ten scientists drawn from Britain, the West Indies and the United States, was due to move its centre of operations from Old Towne to a safer site further north. "There is no point in risking losing the instruments and recorders, so they are moving them to a safe distance," Dr Aspinall said.
The eruption has claimed several key instruments, tiltmeters placed close to the summit of Soufriere which were wiped out in the latest eruption. These were being used to measure small changes in the angle of the ground which are local and cannot be monitored effectively from any distance.
The instruments could be replaced, but only at considerable risk to the person doing it, Dr Aspinall said. Fortunately, observations taken before the tiltmeters were destroyed showed correlations with data from a network of seismic sensors arranged around the volcano. The seismic sensors are still working, so data from them can be used to infer what the tiltmeters could have been showing.
The best instrument, however, remains the human eye. The vulcanologists spend several hours a day standing around at sites to the east and west of Soufriere, waiting for breaks in the cloud so that they can see what the volcano is doing. If the opportunity arises, they also make observations from a helicopter. "It's pretty sapping," Dr Aspinall said. "You don't get much sleep."
The team also uses laser beams and the global positioning network of satellites to detect deformation of the volcano, which gives an indication of movement within it. These signals are useful for monitoring changes over a month or so. They are detecting minor changes that are difficult to interpret.
If dramatic changes were seen they could presage a serious explosion such as the one which destroyed Mount St Helens in northwest United States in 1980, killing 66 people. But no such changes have been detected.
When the volcano does stop erupting, nature will quickly start to recolonise the damaged land. When the eruptions stop, a process called succession will gradually rebuild the cloud forests of the Soufriere Hills. But Dr Deborah Brosnan, an American biologist who has studied the effect of the volcano on Montserrat, says that it will be a long process.

*
30 November 1997
Climate change sparks age of the volcano
Jonathan Leake, Environment Correspondent
SEA level changes caused by global warming could trigger the eruption of hundreds of new or dormant volcanoes, turning the 21st century into the fieriest on record, according to a study by British scientists.
They predict that the rise in volcanic activity would have catastrophic effects on the Earth's climate, damage many cities and affect air quality so badly that "millions" could die from respiratory ailments.
The researchers discovered the volcanic implications of rising sea level after being funded by the European commission to find ways of predicting eruptions around the Mediterranean, where at least two new volcanoes have appeared recently.
They decided the best way to predict the future behaviour of volcanoes was to study their distant past. They found that rises in sea levels caused by periods of global warming have almost all been followed by a surge in volcanic activity.
"These are very startling findings and suggest the 21st century could be one of the most explosive on record," said Bill McGuire, professor of geological hazards at University College London, who led the research team.
The unexpected new danger from global warming comes as ministers from more than 170 nations gather in Kyoto, Japan, to try to forge a deal on future emissions of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases. Global temperatures have already risen by nearly 1C and are expected to increase by another 1.6C by 2050 - enough to melt huge sections of the ice caps.
In a paper published in Nature magazine, McGuire describes how the crucial geological evidence dated back 12,000 years to when sea levels surged by 38ft in two centuries - immediately followed by intense volcanic activity across the world. He adds: "By contrast, there were far fewer eruptions when sea levels were stable, as during the ice age that ended 18,000 years ago."
The team observed that 90% of volcanoes are close to or surrounded by sea and as water rises it begins to erode the lava, with the water lubricating landslides and weakening the rock. Eventually the mountain becomes unable to withstand the internal pressure of the molten rock and explodes.
Intriguingly, the team found evidence that some volcanoes are particularly sensitive to changes in water level. The Pavlof volcano in Alaska emerged as the most sensitive, being set off by changes of just 20cm caused by low pressure weather systems in winter.
The long-term consequences of a surge in eruptions remain unclear, however, because different types of eruption have different products. One possibility is that the millions of tons of ash thrown into the atmosphere could reflect enough sunlight to cool the Earth, reverse global warming or even prompt a new ice age. Alternatively, if the explosions released huge volumes of greenhouse gases, the Earth could heat up even faster.
Worldwide there are 1,500 active volcanoes with a surge apparent in Europe over the past few years. Geologists recently reported that a volcano near Rome which has been dormant for 20,000 years is waking and that a huge bubble of magma has formed three miles underground and 10 miles north of the city.
Also found recently was a huge volcano growing from the ocean floor just north of Crete. Called Columbo, it is causing earthquakes in surrounding islands and could one day form an island itself. In the Caribbean, Montserrat has been devastated by the Soufriere Hills volcano, whose eruptions have been increasing since 1995.
John Dewey, professor of geology at Oxford University, backed the research and said the effect of rising sea levels on Mount Etna in Sicily could be enormous because much of its sides are below water.
Profile: The planet Earth News Review, page 3

On top of the volcano
Brian MacArthur
Greece: Staying in a cave with all mod cons and splendid views is the best way to avoid the crowds on Santorini.
We slept by night in a cave set into an almost perpendicular 900ft cliff and swam by day in the caldera - the crater left by the world's biggest volcanic eruption 3,500 years ago.
Across the cliff were the hulks of the caves that were destroyed when the volcano last erupted 40 years ago. Yet hope - or is it greed anxious to cash in on tourism - usually wins over experience. Forty years on, hundreds of "caves", villas and houses once again tumble perilously down the cliffs of Oia (pronounced Eea) in Santorini, the island at the southernmost end of the Cyclades that was claimed by Plato as Atlantis.
Our cave burrowed deep into the cliff but there was no sense of claustrophobia and it came with all mod cons and a terrace overlooking the caldera and the volcanic island of Thirasia left behind after the earthquake. Wherever we looked, the colour was blue - all the doors, the Aegean that flowed serenely over the caldera so far below and especially the sky. Sometimes it was difficult to detect where the sky ended and the sea began.
The ferries from Athens, a few cruise liners and the occasional yacht or gin palace steamed gently through the channel on their way to Thira, the island's capital.
At night, the sunsets are so spectacular that the clifftop is thronged with tourists. They arrive from all over the island to watch as the sun - appearing as the crimson globe of so many travel brochures - sinks below the horizon and sets the sky in flames.
The tidal wave created by the eruption on Santorini was so powerful that it swamped the Minoan civilisation of Crete 80 miles away and left Santorini, and the civilisation that had flourished there since before the Bronze Age, buried under mountains of volcanic ash, as well as three tiny islands and beaches that still have black sand.
Only this century have archaeologists uncovered their buried civilisation and the two great tourist attractions of Santorini today are from the Bronze Age - the ancient city of Thira, built on a clifftop at nearly 1,000ft to guard against pirates, and Akrotiri, both easily visited from Oia within an hour by car or the ubiquitous scooters.
Men and women were living at Akrotiri and ancient Thira, cultivating their vines and citrus trees, 3,500 years before the birth of Christ and it is an eerie and uplifting experience to visit what remains of their civilisation, a Minoan Pompeii. They knew they were living on a volcano and built their houses with stone, putting wooden joints between the walls to guard against earthquakes. They lived in three-storey houses with working lavatories and exquisite murals on the walls. They fished and hunted animals. They worked with gold, silver, copper, tin and bronze. They sculpted vases and decorated them beautifully.
There are equally eerie experiences in visits by boat from modern Thira, with 587 steps down to the port or a dizzying funicular down the cliff, to the Kameni islands in the caldera which seem like coal heaps, on to the scarcely inhabited Thirasia, and then to watch the sunset from the sea.
Most residents of Santorini still live along the top of the cliffs, with their houses tumbling across the top and down the sides like honeycombs. Seen from the caldera, the red and black cliffs rise spectacularly with a spattering of white houses like icing along the top. Seen from the top of the cliffs, they tumble higgledy-piggledy down the cliffsides, painted white with blue doors, many still in caves, most with balconies, interspersed with tiny alleyways and magnificent views over the sea.
Although it has only a few big beaches, mainly at Perissa and Kamari to the south on the eastern plain, Santorini lives today by tourism; once the season ends in October there is an exodus back to Athens and the mainland. The island is so small that it could easily be spoilt and some areas already are. Kamari is a mini Costa del Sol, thronged with lines of sunbeds and the plain packed with hotels, but adventurous travellers can easily find deserted beaches. We took the bus from Oia to the beach at Columbus, where there were few sunbathers, two decent cafes and swimmers can still occasionally hear the volcano rumbling below them.
August in Thira is a version of hell, as jostling and as crowded as India, thronged with cars and tourists and full of shops, particularly on the Street of Gold, and cafes catering to the day-trippers from the cruise liners.
Santorini is not all spoilt, however, and the authorities seem to have put a stop to new building on the rest of the eastern plain. Oia is at the northernmost tip of the island. It is smaller, less crowded, more elegant and less vulgar than Thira, an enchanting village with a narrow central street, about 6ft wide, with shops, cafes and restaurants on either side, a church and a main square with a baker and a bus station.
We walked down the steep cliff at night to the cafes at the small port where fish were hauled out of the sea, scaled by your table, freshly grilled and served. A good meal with two bottles of wine for two cost less than £20. By day, we could swim from rocks a short walk from the port round the bottom of cliffs.
Yet, unless you enjoy lazing in the sun with a pile of novels, Santorini is a confection, an island to visit for only a few days. So we decided to try another Greek island, from one of the smallest to the biggest, and took the short hop to Crete to see if we could find a part that was still unspoilt. We did, very successfully, at Panormo, 55 kilometres west along the coast from Heraklion, once a busy harbour town for exports to Europe that was left behind when the motorways took over from steam railways.
Panormo today is what Greece used to be like: a small, unhurried and welcoming village where the men still sat in huddles all morning over their coffee. There were only a few shops and a few restaurants above a small deserted beach. We stayed at the Villa Kynthia, only 200 yards from the sea in the centre of the village, an old family house that has been lovingly restored and which now offers five bedrooms, a shaded courtyard and a small swimming pool and is almost next door to the best tavern in town.
All the sights of Crete, including Knossos, can be reached easily from here but we had seen them before and decided on an exploration of the mountains behind Panormo. There are parts of Crete that are packed with tourists but if you want solitude, space, grandeur, breathtaking views and the friendliness of tiny villages such as Kastri, the mountains are the places to go.
Highlight of the holiday was the cave in the hills above Melidoni. It has recently been opened to tourists, though few find it. It was in this vast, underground cave, which still has fragments of pottery from the Minoan era and which has the awesome spaciousness of a cathedral, that 370 villagers took refuge from a Turkish attack in 1823 and refused to surrender. All were suffocated when the leader of the Turkish army set fire to the cave's entrance and their remains are in a large grave in the main hall.
Stepping warily down into the depths of Meloni cave was an eerie reminder of the old conflict between Greek and Turk. It was a relief when we emerged to an al fresco supper of salad and kebabs at the cafe above the cave and gazed down at the lights twinkling from the villages in the now peaceful plain below. The author was a guest of the Greek Islands Club .
FACT FILE.
The author stayed at the Esperas complex at Oia, which the Greek Islands Club Private Collection, 66 High Street, Walton-on- Thames, Surrey (01932
220477) offers from £650 per person per week, including flights, transfers and accommodation. The club offers several other properties on the island, all with views over the caldera, as well as properties in Crete.
The best restaurant on Santorini is the Tomato on the east coast behind the airport. It sets London standards but charges at London standards, too.
Afternoon and evening cruises to the islands cost from about £15. The Thira funicular costs £2. Entrance to Akrotiri: about £3.50.
Flat shoes are essential in Santorini.
Reading: Crete: The Battle and the Resistance , by Antony Beevor (Penguin, £7.99. ISBN 0 140 16787 0).
The Making of the Cretan Landscape , by Oliver Rackham (Manchester University
Press, £19.99, ISBN 0 719 03647 X). Crete (Rough Guides, £8.99,
*
Sitting on a time bomb
Anjana Ahuja
Vulcanologists predict a major eruption - but they cannot say where.
A handsome volcano expert predicts an eruption and warns a nearby town to evacuate; the warning is ignored, with deadly consequences. The plot of Dante's Peak , in which Pierce Brosnan stars as the heroic vulcanologist, could easily be dismissed as trite.
Yet the truth about volcanoes, Nature's most vicious and dramatic time bombs, makes for disturbing reading. Vulcanologists predict, using historical records, that a major eruption is imminent. As yet, there is no foolproof method of knowing which of the planet's 600-odd active volcanoes will blow its top. It seems Hollywood's reading of the situation isn't too wide of the mark.
And there's worse. Some of the most volcanically active regions, such as the Aleutian Islands off Alaska, lie under key airline routes. The United States Geological Survey estimates that for four days a year, billowing clouds of volcanic ash pose a significant hazard to air traffic.
Satellites look likely to pro vide the answer. Two European remote sensing satellites, ERS-1 and ERS-2, have been monitoring ground movements at Mount Etna. Next year will see the launch of AM-1, an American satellite that will map lava flows, measure the drift of volcanic clouds, and monitor emissions of sulphur dioxide. Another satellite, LightSAR, which would provide the most detailed and consistent information on volcanic activity so far, is in the planning stage.
"The height of the ground can shift vertically by about six inches prior to an eruption," says Dr Jeffrey Plaut, a geologist at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, and researcher on LightSAR.
"It is caused by the magma swelling around the summit. The groundshifts tend to go hand in hand with changes in lava flows and emissions." The LightSAR instrumenta tion would be capable of measuring shifts in centimetres. However, scientists admit that the time lag between seeing a shift and an eruption could be anything from hours to months.
Until now, researchers have had to garner information from instruments on the ground and aircraft flyovers. They have enjoyed some success - the eruption in 1991 of Mount Pinatubo in the Philippines was forecast, and 85,000 people were evacuated. An eruption in Papua New Guinea was also predicted 24 hours beforehand. However, ground instruments and flyovers present serious drawbacks.
First, it is often risky for people and planes to get too close to an volcano - several vulcanologists have died over the past few years during ground experiments. Instruments can succumb to the harsh environment, and they can also perish if the volcano stirs. Dr Plaut says: "There tend to be precursors to eruptions, and one of these pulses in activity can be enough to wipe out instruments."
That makes data-gathering patchy, which renders the reliable identification of trends almost impossible. Another hindrance is that not all areas are accessible, either because the terrain is remote or because of political barriers.
These remote regions can be monitored from space. It would also assist countries who cannot afford to maintain a network of ground instruments. The other bonus is that radar can be used night and day, and in cloudy weather, giving more consistent coverage. The pulses are bounced off the Earth, and any change in the returning "echoes" indicates a shift.
As for the threat to aircraft, an American vulcanologist has come up with an intriguing idea. Dr Dave Pieri, also from the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, has proposed installing a constellation of three or four satellites with the sole intention of monitoring the turbulent "ring of fire" surrounding the Pacific. Thought to be one of the most active regions, it also happens to sit beneath a popular flight path.
In these cash-strapped times, Dr Pieri has floated the idea of funding the constellation by levying a seven-dollar fee on every airline passenger flying those routes. In other words, the scheme would introduce a "volcano tax". The plan is being discussed by the aviation authorities.
"The route from Anchorage to Tokyo passes over about 300 active volcanoes," Dr Pieri says. "With the South-East Asian economy growing so quickly, traffic can only expand. The great threat is that volcanic plumes can reach aircraft alti tudes. The ash gets sucked in the engine and melts, and this can stop the engine cooling. As a result, the engines can overheat. It really is a pressing issue. To my mind, it is the most direct worldwide threat from volcanoes."
Dr Pieri is not the only expert anxious to hurry research along. Bill McGuire, a vulcanologist from University College London, has repeatedly warned that too little is being done to prepare for the worst. Vulcanologists around the world think that the issue is taking on a fresh urgency, especially as the settlements near dormant volcanoes expand.
But despite the fears, vulcanologists have to cope with funding problems and political hurdles. Plans for a dedicated volcano satellite, the Volcano Infrared Eruption Watcher (View), were shelved last year. It might yet be revived.
Dr Pieri also acknowledges the "dicey balancing act" needed to protect people, but at the same time guard against false alarms. After all, evacuating populations is an expensive task and nobody would want to get it wrong.
Dr Pieri says: "This goes all the way back to Pompeii. There is evidence that a lot of people knew something big was on the way, but because the town was a rich agricultural region, and a resort for the Roman literati, nothing was done. And look what happened."


<#NYT>
*
October 27, 2002
Italian Volcano Erupts; No Injuries
By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
CATANIA, Sicily (AP) -- Mount Etna, Europe's biggest and most active volcano, came to life again Sunday, spewing lava but causing no injuries. A series of small earthquakes damaged buildings on the slopes of the mountain, officials said.
The stream of lava destroyed some ski lift pylons as it headed toward Piano Provenzana, an area which sits at 7,500 feet and is used by tourists as a starting point for mountain walks.
The area was evacuated and sealed by police, said civil defense officials in Catania.
Later Sunday, forests near Piano Provenzana caught fire. Helicopters doused the flames.
Sicily's main eastern airport, Catania's Fontanarossa, was closed down, with many flights rerouted to Palermo, the island's capital city. The airport was scheduled to reopen Monday morning.
After months of silence, Etna's rumbled to life overnight, when as many as 200 small quakes rattled eastern Sicily, some creating panic and sending people to the streets.
The strongest quake was magnitude-4.2, according to the National Institute of Geophysics and Vulcanology.
The lava flow, which was growing heavier by the hour, was still far from settlements. The mountain also was belching a fountain of ash and sand that made for poor visibility miles away.
Etna towers 10,860 feet above Sicily. The last major eruption was in 1992.

*
October 28, 2002
Italy Scrambles Water - Planes to Stem Etna Flows
By REUTERS
CATANIA, Italy (Reuters) - Italian rescue teams sent water-carrying planes into the skies Monday to try to stem rivers of boiling lava flowing from Mount Etna after a series of earthquakes awakened Europe's most active volcano.
While the snaking tongues of magma remained a safe distance from the several settlements on the mountain, fears were raised Monday after a fresh tremor measuring 3.8 on the Richter scale struck almost directly beneath the volcano.
At the weekend, Italy's National Institute of Geophysics and Volcanology measured more than 100 small quakes measuring 1.1 to 3.5 on the Richter scale.
Residents of Linguaglossa, a popular ski town whose name means ``big tongue of lava,'' nervously eyed the glowing rocks and boiling liquid streaming down the mountain.
``What can I say? Just look at it. My heart's bleeding,'' Mayor Felice Stagnitta told Reuters Television, as pine trees blazed behind him.
Graziella Pappalardo wept on a friend's shoulder, as she realized her family restaurant ``Racabo Refuge'' up the mountain had been engulfed in lava. ``The emergency services are a mess, the lava has already arrived here, they're just a mess,'' she said, blinking back tears and trembling as Etna roared behind her.
The eruptions began in the early hours of Sunday, after several small earthquakes shook the eastern edge of Sicily and parts of mainland Italy. The epicenter was identified as just one mile southeast of the center of Etna's crater. 
CLOUDS OF ASH
The volcano, Europe's highest at 10,900 feet, pumped out huge dark clouds of ash and spurted fountains of magma 300 to 600 feet into the air.
So far there have been no deaths or injuries, though the lava flow has swallowed buildings, knocked down power lines and pushed over ski-lift pylons.
But Italian scientists said Monday the level of volcanic activity was still ``very intense.''
Linguaglossa, which has about 6,000 inhabitants, is still some distance from two lava flows that civil protection officials estimated were up to 350 yards wide.
Town officials were taking no chances, closing schools for the next two days. The local priest said he was keeping the church open, however, to allow the faithful to pray.
Meanwhile ash continued to rain down on Catania, Sicily's second-largest city which sits in the shadow of Etna.
The main airport remained closed, with flights redirected to Sicily's capital Palermo, while choking ash swirling about in the air was making walking about the city difficult.
Etna is almost constantly rumbling, but has not produced any serious activity since a series of eruptions in July and August last year, which experts described as one of the most erratic and complex displays in 300 years.
Its last major eruption was in 1992. 

*
October 16, 2002, Wednesday 
Montserrat Volcano's Peak Rising Again 
SALEM, Montserrat, Oct. 15 -- The peak of the volcano that dominates the Caribbean island of Montserrat is rising every day as burning rock and ash pile up, making an eruption almost inevitable, officials said today. 
''If the dome grows as it is, something has to give one way or another,'' said Dr. Peter Dunkley, director of the Montserrat Volcano Observatory. ''It will be a messy situation when it happens.'' 
After nearly four centuries of dormancy, the Soufriere Hills volcano roared back to life in 1995, killing 19 people and burying the south of the British territory. Many islanders fled, reducing the population from 11,000 to 4,000. 
In the past few years, the volcano has calmed, but the dome continues to grow and collapse. A collapsing dome sends rivers of superheated rock, ash and gases down the mountain's flanks. 

*
December 21, 2000, Thursday 
Mexican Volcano Is Calm 
CHOLULA, Mexico, Dec. 21 -- The Popocatepetl volcano, near Mexico City, settled into a quiet slumber today after erupting on Monday and Tuesday, and volcano experts said the worst may be over. 
But officials said they would probably keep residents of towns on the slopes in shelters through Christmas. Soldiers maintained roadblocks to ward off looters and to keep residents from returning for now. 
The volcano, which rises 17,886 feet, sprayed hot rock and ash on Monday and Tuesday. But today its crater seemed just a dusty ridge. 
''The tremors have diminished considerably,'' said Guillermo Melgarejo, director of civil defense for Puebla State. Fernando Lopez, a spokesman for the interior secretary, predicted ''there will no longer be a big eruption'' because the volcano was ''releasing pressure.'' 

*
December 18, 2000, Monday 
Under the Boiling Mexican Volcano 
The Popocatepetl volcano, 40 miles from Mexico City, has showered several nearby communities with ash for several days. Officials said they had determined that a dome of lava has formed in the volcano, and they recommended that about 41,000 people living within a 7.4-mile radius evacuate their homes. 
About 10,000 residents had been evacuated by yesterday, but many were refusing to leave their homes, said official and news reports. 
Comparing the volcano to a blocked pressure cooker, scientists said they were concerned that the building pressure could touch off a strong eruption, possibly throwing rocks and other debris for several miles. 
The 17,884-foot-high Popocatepetld, or ''smoking mountain'' in the indigenous Nahuatl language, was inactive from 1927 to 1994, when there was a moderate eruption. Since then it has been increasingly active. 

*
August 6, 1997, Wednesday 
Volcano in Montserrat Forces New Evacuations 
SALEM, Montserrat, Aug. 5 -- The island's volcano erupted today for the second straight day, forcing hundreds of people to flee from areas that had been considered beyond the volcano's reach. 
The volcano hurled a dense column of rocks and ash into the air just before dawn, hours after the Government evacuated villages in the heavily populated west-central portion of Montserrat. 
Lethal avalanches of searing rock, ash and gas barreled down the volcano's sides at 100 miles per hour. Pebble-size debris rained down on villages, including Salem, where more than half the 11-mile-long island's remaining 4,000 residents live. 
Residents raced for their cars, jamming the only road north from Salem -- and away from the volcano. 
It was a repeat of their retreat on Monday, when the volcano erupted twice, pummeling the capital city of Plymouth, abandoned to the volcano two years ago. 
The city was still burning today, its landmark buildings now kindling for the volcanic flows. 
Montserrat's volcano roared to life two years ago, eventually forcing two-thirds of the British colony's 11,000 people to move off the island. 

*
August 4, 1997, Monday 
Montserrat's Capital Hit By Volcano's Debris 
SALEM, Montserrat, Aug. 3 -- A major eruption at Montserrat's volcano sent searing rock and debris barreling into the abandoned capital today, ripping through wooden houses in the island's historic center. 
It was the first time super-heated flows of ash and rock had entered Plymouth, evacuated after the Soufriere Hills volcano sprang to life in July 1995. 
''We're experiencing a bit of a crisis,'' said Jill Norton, deputy chief scientist at the Montserrat Volcano Observatory, shortly after the volcano began erupting in the early evening. 
Plumes of smoke and flames could be seen shooting up from the capital from as far away as Salem, a town about five miles north of Plymouth in the designated safe zone. 
Nearly half of the British Colony's 11,000 residents have fled the island since its southern half was declared off limits in 1995. Hundreds more residents of Montserrat have left since a June 25 eruption killed 10 people in the evacuated zone. 

*
August 1, 1997, Friday 
Volcano on Montserrat Erupts Without Warning 
OLD TOWNE, Montserrat, July 31 -- A month after eruptions killed at least 10 people, Montserrat's volcano erupted again today, touching off small avalanches of super-heated rock and gas, but authorities said there was no immediate danger of bigger blasts. 
The eruptions occurred without warning, said Bob Webb, head of the British Governor's office. They were small compared with those that killed 10 people on June 25; 9 other people are missing and feared dead. 
Nearly half of Montserrat's 11,000 people have fled since the volcano surged to life in July 1995, and Britain said last week that it would poll residents about whether they wanted to abandon the island. 
The southern third of the island, including the capital, Plymouth, was evacuated two years ago. 

*
March 5, 2002, Tuesday 
Early Warnings When the Volcano Starts to Slip 
By KENNETH CHANG 
Every 300,000 years or so, a piece of earth about the size of Rhode Island slides off the side of a Hawaiian volcano and falls into the ocean. The splash -- a disastrous ocean-size version of tossing a pebble in a pond -- sends rings of waves 100 feet and higher radiating outward until they crash, catastrophically, against shorelines around the Pacific Rim, from California to South America to Australia. 
Writing in the current issue of Nature, scientists at the United States Geological Survey's Hawaiian Volcano Observatory report that they have, for the first time, directly observed a sudden slip of a volcano slope. 
This particular slip moved only a few inches and does not presage a collapse, the scientists said, and it demonstrated that satellite monitoring systems could provide weeks or months of warning of a collapse. 
''I like to say these flank collapses are like meteor impacts,'' said Dr. Peter Cervelli, a research geophysicist at the observatory and an author of the paper. ''It is indisputable they occur. It is indisputable when they occur, they cause catastrophic damage, but we also know their occurrence is very rare.'' 
The southern flank of the Kilauea volcano on Hawaii, a possible location of a future giant landslide, is continually in motion without posing any danger, sliding at a glacial rate of three to four inches a year. 
On Nov. 8, 2000, the motion suddenly accelerated by factor of several hundred, with some parts of the slope moving as much as half an inch over the course of one day. 
A person standing on the ground there would not have noticed anything, but sensors on the volcano communicating with global positioning satellites made note of the shifts. 
The movements were similar to what scientists would expect for the beginnings of a catastrophic flank collapse, but in this case, the accelerated motion lasted only a day and a half before returning to its normal crawl. 
Scientists at the volcano observatory say that unlike earthquakes, where a swarm of small temblors may signal a large quake to follow, the small slip is not a sign of larger slips to come. 
''It's not a priming,'' said Dr. Asta Miklius, a geophysicist at the observatory and another author of the Nature paper. 
But the scientists were interested in understanding what had moved deep underground to cause the surface shifts. Their computer models indicate that a 9-mile-by-3-mile slab located about 2 1/2 miles underground slipped about 3 1/2 inches, pulling along the ground above it. The event was equivalent to a magnitude 5.7 earthquake, they said. 
The scientists hypothesize that heavy rainfall nine days earlier -- three feet of rain in 36 hours -- may have been the cause, either by lubricating the underground fault or by adding weight to the slope. 
In an accompanying commentary, Dr. Steven N. Ward, a research geophysicist at the University of California at Santa Cruz, describes in detail the devastating destruction a flank collapse would unleash with up to 1,200 cubic miles of rock sliding at speeds of up to 100 miles an hour for 20 to 40 miles. The eruption of Mount St. Helens, by contrast, blew away only three-quarters of a cubic mile of material, Dr. Ward said. 
The slide would be the trigger for giant waves known as tsunami. ''It's going to stir up a pretty big wave,'' Dr. Ward said. ''You can visualize the large wave getting started and propagating across the Pacific.'' 
Dr. Ward's computer simulations indicate that a series of about 20 waves about 100 feet tall would scour the California coast. Smaller, but still devastating, waves would wash up along South America, Australia and islands in the Pacific. 
But because flank collapses are so rare, ''I don't lose any sleep over it,'' Dr. Ward said. He estimates that one occurs somewhere in the world once every 10,000 years. 
Debris from the last collapse of Kilauea's flank has been dated at more than 200,000 years old. 
The paper by the scientists in Hawaii, however, shows that the monitoring system on Kilauea provides a useful model for watching other oceanic volcanoes should the unlikely calamity occur. 
''These things ought to be at least kept an eye on,'' Dr. Ward said. 

*
January 19, 2002, Saturday 
Tens of Thousands Flee a Devastating Volcano in Congo 
By MARC LACEY 
ADDIS ABABA, Ethiopia, Jan. 18 -- Tens of thousands of refugees poured across Congo's eastern border into Rwanda today, fleeing a vicious volcano outside Goma that spewed torrents of burning lava through the town. 
The lava flows, six feet deep in some areas, devastated the border town and fueled a vast humanitarian crisis in a region already suffering from a long-running civil war. Reports from the scene indicated that flames and smoke filled the horizon and the smell of sulfur hung heavy in the air. 
There was no information yet on deaths or injuries, said Stephen Johnson, an official in the United Nations office for the coordination of humanitarian affairs in New York. 
Nyiragongo volcano, which stands 11,380 feet high and has a deadly past, began erupting before dawn on Thursday, sending a torrent of ash into the air and three separate lava flows down on surrounding villages. Local radio reports played down the incident at first and urged residents to remain calm. 
But the volcano continued to spew and residents, recalling a 1977 eruption that killed almost 2,000 people in less than half an hour, eventually grabbed what they could and ran. Some literally raced the lava, sprinting just a few feet in front of the flow. 
The damage was indiscriminate, with lava virtually destroying Goma's cathedral but narrowly missing the headquarters of the United Nations observer mission in Goma, where 250 Moroccan peacekeepers are stationed. Agence France-Presse reported that at the airport in Goma, parts of the runway were submerged by lava but the buildings and fuel stocks were untouched. 
''It's a catastrophic emergency,'' said Pascal Ngoga, Rwanda's ambassador to the African Union, which is based here in the Ethiopian capital. ''We understand that there are about 300,000 people without any provisions who have crossed the border into Rwanda. Our government is meeting right now to plan a response.'' Goma's population was about 400,000. 
Rwanda opened its border to the desperate Congolese but the tiny Rwandan border town of Gisenyi was straining to accommodate the crush of arrivals. 
United Nations officials warned today that because the lava flow was continuing, even Gisenyi might have to be evacuated. 
By late today, refugees were still on the move. Some trekked farther east into Rwanda, to Ruhengeri. Others who had spent the night on the streets of Gisenyi began moving back toward Goma. But fires continued to burn there, the ground shook at regular intervals and experts said that while the volcano appeared to have spewed all its lava for now, toxic gas remained a danger. 
''There no longer appears to be danger directly linked to the eruption,'' Dieudonné Waffula, director of Goma's center for the study of volcanos, told Agence France-Presse. 
The aftereffects will linger. Many crops were wiped out by the lava, and the authorities feared that Lake Kivu, the main water supply for the area, might become contaminated, and even explosive, should there be large amounts of volcanic runoff. 
Residents feared that the eruption of Nyiragongo might set off the other active volcano in the area, Nyamuragira, which erupted early last year but did not cause any casualties. 
The densely forested region of Central Africa contains a string of volcanos but only Nyiragongo and Nyamuragira are active. 
''There's a situation approaching chaos in some areas, and we can't predict when or how the volcano will erupt again,'' Rob Wilkinson, a spokesman for Oxfam in Goma, said in an interview with the BBC. 
Humanitarian groups, which have a heavy presence in Goma because of the many war refugees, were on the scene at the moment of the eruption. But some found their offices, vehicles and storerooms overrun by lava. The World Food Program said it had already begun shipping tons of high-energy biscuits to the area. 
''Goma is literally burned to the ground,'' said James Mathenge, director of World Vision's office in eastern Congo. ''We really have a terrible human catastrophe here.'' 
For the desperate residents of Goma, the eruption was one more disaster to endure. More than a million ethnic Hutu fled to camps around Goma after the 1994 ethnic massacres of Tutsi in Rwanda, fearing the Tutsi's revenge. More recently the town has become the base of the Congolese Rally for Democracy, one of the many rebel groups that have turned Congo into one of Africa's deadliest places. ''It's a natural disaster on top of a terrible conflict that has already cost millions of lives,'' Mr. Wilkinson said. 
Moïse Katembo, a worker at the Goma water plant, which was destroyed by the lava, fled Goma with his children when a house a few doors down from his own was already in flames. ''I wonder what fate has in store for us now,'' he said in an interview with Agence France-Presse. 

*
December 20, 2000, Wednesday 
Mexicans Resist Flight From 'Friendly' Volcano 
By TIM WEINER 
MEXICO CITY, Dec. 19 -- Every thousand years or so, the great Popocatepetl explodes with killing force, and as it rumbled and puffed this weekend, government officials monitoring geophysicists' instruments pleaded with thousands of villagers under the volcano to flee. 
Few did. People fought to stay put, even after it erupted violently throughout Monday night and this morning, flinging glowing five-foot rocks for miles, in what is believed to be its biggest bang in more than a millennium. They felt strongly that the volcano -- their volcano, revered as the god of rain and giver of rich soil -- was more benevolent a force than their government. 
''The people in the villages consider Popo a friendly volcano, the beating heart of the land,'' said Homero Aridjis, a poet, former diplomat and president of PEN, the international writers' association. ''It's our Indian beliefs against European science.'' 
Maybe they were right: though the mountain is hurling incandescent bombs, potentially threatening everyone for 20 miles around, it has killed no one yet. But this clash of verities versus technology -- or human nature against nature -- is an old story. And since the volcano still is capable of an immense explosion, it is far from over. 
Scientists and the government warned today that a full-blown eruption, pouring rivers of lava down Popocatepetl's slopes, could come at any time. The volcano, less than 40 miles east of Mexico City and its nearly 20 million people, fumed billows of gray ash all day. The wind carried it south, sparing the metropolis and its international airport a coat of abrasive soot. 
All day Monday and today, government sound trucks went through villages near the volcano, blaring warnings. Church bells rang out danger and army commanders appeared with evacuation orders. But thousands resisted the call. Vicente Jimenez, a 26-year-old corn farmer from Santiago Xanitzintla, about seven miles from the flaming crater, heard all the alarms and was unmoved. 
''We never left,'' he said today. ''We don't feel comfortable leaving our homes and everything we own in the hands of the authorities. For many people leaving was hard enough, but leaving our homes in the hands of the police is even harder.'' 
A fellow farmer who stayed behind, Adolfo Castro, 55, said: ''This is a very old village. The church is important to us, and there was no one guarding it. There are antiquities inside that go back centuries.'' 
An army commander charged with carrying out evacuation today shook his head. ''It's too late to be fighting with these people,'' he said. ''They've shut themselves in behind four locks. They are older people who will never leave.'' 
More than 20,000 people appeared to have turned down the government's offers of transportation, food and shelter. ''Their resistance is reasonable, based on their experience,'' said Luis Gonzalez y Gonzalez, a historian at the National College. ''The people have nothing to identify with but their families and their land.'' 
After nearly seven decades of deep sleep, 17,945-foot Popocatepetl, (pronounced poh-poh-kah-TEH-peh-tel), became active again in December 1994. Since then, government scientists have erected a world-class monitoring network of sensors around it, measuring its internal pressure and recording its smallest tremors. 
The Mexican government also set up 1,232 shelters with room for more than 300,000 people. It accurately predicted the eruption, broadcast the warning clearly and yet could not persuade people to leave through reason alone. 
Part of the resistance lies in village traditions. People call the volcano Don Gregorio or Don Goyo for short, and see him as a living, giving creature. Shamans in the villages communicate with him and insist he will not hurt people unless people hurt him. 
''People here still carry gifts up the mountain, a stewpot of turkey with mole, a basket of fruits,'' said Tomas Jimenez, Vicente's father, who said his family has lived in Santiago Xanitzintla for centuries. ''They ask for a better harvest or more rain.'' 
Part of the fight against flight has an even deeper foundation, though. 
''It's human nature,'' said Dan Miller, a research geologist and the chief of the United States Volcano Disaster Assistance Program, which is based in Vancouver, Wash., and has worked in more than a dozen countries, throughout Latin America, Asia and Africa. 
''Wherever we go in the world we have met with the same kind of problem,'' said Dr. Miller, whose program is run by the United States Office of Foreign Disaster Assistance and the United States Geological Survey. 
''People who live in high-risk zones around volcanoes don't expect an eruption to take place, and if it did, they don't expect it to affect them. Government scientists in the U.S. and elsewhere meet with mistrust when they issue proclamations or recommendations. People don't understand or believe their warnings.'' 
The same thing happened at the Mount St. Helen's eruption in Washington state 20 years ago. ''When Mount St. Helen's woke up after 123 years, a fair number of people refused to be evacuated, and many of the 57 people killed had illegally entered into closed-off and restricted areas,'' Dr. Miller said. 
Late last year in Ecuador, at least 22,000 villagers were evacuated by the government when the 16,475-foot volcano called Tungurahua -- ''Throat of Fire'' in the Quechua Indian language -- showed signs that a violent explosion was coming. ''Now 15 months have gone by and the predicted devastating events haven't occurred,'' Dr. Miller said. ''And the people have fought their way through military barricades back home. And they're there now, even though the eruptions continue.'' 
This evening, though some villages were all but deserted, it appeared that roughly 30,000 people -- slightly more than half of the 56,000 people the government wanted to protect -- had accepted the offer of shelter, said the interior minister, Santiago Creel. Mr. Creel, who like the rest of the government of President Vicente Fox has been in power only 18 days, said he saw the futility of forcing the others to leave. 
''We don't think there's a clear way for us to remove the whole population,'' he said. 
And Mr. Fox, touring Cholula, the largest town near the smoking cone of Popocateptl, spoke for many of the villagers when he said the future under the volcano was as clear as the ashen cloud over it. 
''We have to wait and see what Mr. Popocatepetl says,'' Mr. Fox observed. ''Because he's the one setting the agenda here. Nobody else can.'' 

*
August 11, 1997, Monday 
Jittery Volcano Is Transforming Caribbean Gem Into Isle of Ash 
By LARRY ROHTER 
SALEM, Montserrat, Aug. 10 -- The long-abandoned capital lies in ruins, destroyed a week ago by a tide of volcanic ash and superheated gas. Nearly two-thirds of the island's population has been evacuated, and the 4,000 people who remain now worry that all of their tiny Caribbean island may soon be unfit for human habitation. 
''The edge of the uninhabitable zone keeps moving further and further north,'' Margaret Wilson, a longtime resident, said Friday morning, just minutes before the Soufriere Hills volcano erupted again. It sent an ominous cloud mushrooming 35,000 feet into the sky, blotted out the sun and rained ash and pebbles all over this British colony. 
''We've got no port anymore, no Government buildings, no hospital and no airport,'' she added. ''So you wonder how much longer we're going to be able to hang on.'' 
Montserrat was often called ''The Emerald Isle of the Caribbean'' in honor of both the Irish colonists who settled here in the mid-1600's and the lush landscape that attracted upscale tourists. For two years, since the volcano awoke from four centuries of dormancy, the residents have been confronting disaster. But over the last two months, the situation here, 350 miles southeast of Puerto Rico, has taken a sharp turn again for the worse. 
On June 25, Soufriere began spewing a river of ash, rock and gas, heated to temperatures as high as 900 degrees Fahrenheit, down its slopes at speeds of more than 100 miles an hour. Those lethal ''pyroclastic flows,'' as volcanologists call them, left at least 10 people dead and forced the abandonment of several villages. Another 9 people are missing and presumed buried under volcanic debris. 
Then, on July 31, after a respite that left people here hoping the worst was over, a new and even more dangerous cycle began. Since then, the volcano has been erupting almost every 12 hours. 
It quickly claimed the abandoned capital, Plymouth, as its most spectacular victim when gas and rock jumped over a gully filled to overflowing with debris and set the town on fire. 
Friday morning's eruption, preceded by an official warning siren a couple of hours earlier, brought residents into the street and all other activity to a halt as they waited to see what would happen. 
Minutes after the initial explosion, the island was plunged into darkness, cars and trucks began slipping and sliding on roads coated with ash, and people headed home as if through a winter blizzard, their faces covered with surgical or gas masks and their hair coated a ghostly white. 
''There's no way to get on with anything in these conditions,'' said Thomas Farrell, a farmer who has twice had to abandon residences in the exclusion zone south of here because of volcanic eruptions and who moved with his wife into a shelter last week. ''Do we stay or do we go? We'd like to be done with it, one way or the other, bang or no bang.'' 
Such concerns are not idle in a region where many islands are of volcanic origin. When Mount Pelee in the nearby French territory of Martinique last erupted in 1902, it killed an estimated 30,000 people. Volcanic ash from the Soufriere Hills volcano has rained down on islands as far away as St. Thomas, in the Virgin Islands. 
But Jill Norton, an English volcanologist who is the deputy chief of the Montserrat Volcano Observatory, said there is no way to provide the assurances that people here are seeking. While eruptions ''have been gradually increasing in intensity,'' she said, there is always the possibility that the volcano could shift its pattern and suddenly stop erupting, as it did on Saturday, when a predicted ''large event'' failed to materialize. 
''It's anybody's guess, really,'' she said. ''The only thing we can say is that with many volcanos, there is a pattern of five or six years of eruption before they go dormant again.'' 
Before the volcano erupted on July 18, 1995, tourism was the backbone of the economy here. But once Plymouth and its harbor were evacuated, cruise ships stopped calling. 
And with the airport in the off-limits zone since June, many mountainside villas buried under ash and the last hotel that had still been functioning now closed, many people are without a livelihood. A medical school for American students has also closed. 
''I've lost everything -- everything I had is gone,'' said Danny Sweeney, owner of a water sports business that, in the prosperous years past, allowed him to teach visiting rock luminaries like Sting and members of Dire Straits how to windsurf and water-ski. 
''I'm thinking of leaving, and yet I'm thinking of staying,'' he added. ''I can't make a decision because I have a lot of money tied up here.'' 
At the moment, the entire southern half of this pear-shaped, 39-square-mile island is officially off limits, and residents who attempt to venture into the exclusion zone are subject to arrest. 
The remainder of the island is divided into a central buffer zone, open during daylight hours except after the warning siren sounds, and a northern ''safe zone'' where the local Government hopes to rebuild Montserratian society. 
Of those who have not left for Britain or neighboring islands such as Antigua, Nevis or Guadeloupe, more than 1,000 people have been living in churches and schools that have been turned into shelters -- some for more than two years. There they live in small, makeshift cubicles, separated from their neighbors only by curtains and dependent on a monthly voucher from the Government of $45 per adult -- less for children -- to buy food. 
''This is no way to live, but we have to trust in the Almighty,'' said James Halloran, one of nearly 60 people living in a small Anglican church from which the pews have been removed. ''This island is our home, so we will stay as long as we can. But if we have to go, then we will go.'' 
Even those fortunate enough to remain in their own homes or to have found dwellings to rent have been affected by the damage the volcano has inflicted. 
Rents have skyrocketed, as has the cost of food, much of which now has to be imported because many farms are in the exclusion zone; and so family budgets are severely strained. 
Banks refuse to make the loans that might help people build new houses or businesses. ''There's no security,'' said the manager of one bank. In addition, insurance companies, which had gradually been reducing their payments on claims for damage, canceled all policies beginning this month, residents and relief officials said. 
''They moved the goal posts on us last year, and now this,'' said Shirley Skinner, a retired Englishwoman who has moved five times in the last two years. 
Because of restrictions on movement in the exclusion zone, many people were unable to visit their homes to determine the degree of damage and to make an insurance claim before the deadline passed. 
At the same time, though, the residents holding on here complain that they are still expected to meet their normal legal obligations. Many who have relocated to rented houses continue to receive, and pay at least in part, the mortgage bills for the homes that they have not been able to visit for months and that may very well have been destroyed. 
''What annoys me most is that just a couple of weeks ago, I got a tax bill for land and property I can't even see,'' said Thomas Griffin, a former cattle and sheep farmer from the town of Amersham, in the exclusion zone. ''Everything I have is gone, so I tell the Government to please send the bill to the volcano.'' 
With schools being used for shelters, many parents have decided to send their children to Britain or to other Caribbean islands to continue their education. But ''we pay the passage ourselves,'' said William Taylor, who has sent three of his nine children to Birmingham, England and two more to neighboring St. Kitts. 
The Government, the banks, the insurance companies, the owners of houses who are raising rents -- all have ''got no sympathy for nobody,'' Mr. Griffith contended. ''It's a damn disgrace.'' 
Life on this island was turned upside down before, when Hurricane Hugo roared through here in 1989 and destroyed or damaged most houses and the main Government buildings. 
The colonial Government, which made a huge investment in the capital after the hurricane, has generally taken an optimistic tone and has not intervened in business matters. 
Because the island managed to recover from the hurricane, some community leaders express confidence that this calamity too can and will be overcome. 
''We've been pelted by the volcano, and we've had to go dodging stones,'' said Rose Willock, hostess of the morning program on Radio Montserrat, the main source of information here. ''But this society will continue to exist, that's for sure.'' 
Mr. Taylor and others who have been displaced, however, seem to be not quite so sure. There comes a point, he said, when ''you can't take it no more and you have to leave,'' and a volcano that erupts over and over again is more likely to produce that feeling than a hurricane. 
''A lot of people say that folks here must be strong to be carrying on with all of this,'' he continued. ''But people are leaving all the time. The more the activity goes on, the more they are getting up and going. Who knows what will happen next?'' 

*
November 10, 1996
Hawaii Island in Shadow of Volcano Takes Its Jolts With a Shrug 
Just about anywhere else in the world, people flee from an erupting volcano. But here on the Big Island of Hawaii, Kilauea has been pushing out lava for so long -- 13 years now -- that most people who live in its shadow are blase about it. 
''I don't worry about the volcano,'' said Phil Henderson, owner of a popular coffee shop in Hilo, a city of 40,000 less than 30 miles from Kilauea's 4,000-foot summit. ''I don't think about the volcano, although it's exciting, new earth being formed.'' 
Kilauea's eruption is more fluid, and less gaseous, than those of many other volcanoes -- a relatively slow oozing or fountaining of lava through fissures, rather than a catastrophic explosion like that of Mount St. Helens in Washington State in 1980. That eruption, in which the top 1,300 feet of the mountain disappeared in a few minutes, killed about 60 people. By contrast, one person has died since Kilauea's latest eruption began in 1983 -- a visitor who ventured beyond a safety barricade. 
''I feel less danger from the volcano than living near the San Andreas Fault,'' said Sharon Jones, who moved here one and a half years ago from Southern California. ''If the lava threatens, we'd have time.'' 
Kilauea's lava has been destructive: 181 homes burned by contact with the molten rock, which reaches about 1,800 degrees Fahrenheit. Total damage has been estimated at more than $150 million. 
Much of the 1.7 billion cubic yards of lava that has come from the volcano since 1983 has reached the ocean, enlarging the island by about 500 acres. Other flows have covered roads, but residents take it in stride when the highway they are driving on abruptly ends under a new wall of lava that was not there the last time. 
Hawaii legend says the volcano is the home of Madame Pele, Goddess of Fire, and although many say they do not believe, they still make offerings to the Goddess -- ti leaves and gin, Pele's drink of choice -- to keep on her good side just in case. 
''Pele is our friend,'' said Lindy Akana, a Hawaiian who has lived on this island for 28 years. ''We feel awe and respect when we see her in action. When she wipes out houses, it's because they weren't using the land the way they should, or it was land they shouldn't be on.'' 
Kilauea is the most studied volcano in the world. At the United States Geological Survey's Hawaiian Volcano Observatory, situated on Kilauea's rim, scientists measure and monitor the eruption, occasionally stopping to replace instruments buried by lava. Arnold Okamura, deputy scientist in charge of the observatory, said that no one could predict if Kilauea would ever stop erupting. 
Lava watching is also popular among tourists and local residents. The occasional lava stream or large fountain -- some of which reach several hundred feet into the air -- often create traffic jams going to the nearest viewing site. 
Harry Kim, civil defense director for Hawaii County, gives regular updates, alerts and warnings about the volcano, and they have made him a household name here. Mr. Kim, an island native, owns beachfront property once threatened by the very volcano he monitors. 
Mr. Kim, who is on call 24 hours a day, keeps safety the top priority. But he has no doubt about what is in second place: ''Giving mankind a once-in-a-lifetime experience of seeing a live volcano in action.'' 
To that end, he has been known to walk around his own barricades and venture into a darkened lava field at night, estimate how long it will take for lava to arrive, and move the barricades closer so that people can get a better glimpse of a glowing river of molten rock passing mere feet in front of them. 

*
July 26, 1996
Alerts in Hawaii as Undersea Volcano Erupts 
By The New York Times 
The world's most active volcano, now in its 14th year of continuous eruption, is generating swarms of earthquakes powerful enough to concern Civil Defense officials here. 
The volcano, Loihi (pronounced low-EE-hee), which means "tall" in Hawaiian, is underwater about 20 miles southeast of the southern tip the island of Hawaii. 
Seismologists at United States Geological Survey Hawaiian Volcano Observatory, in the Hawaii Volcanoes National Park, have recorded almost 1,500 earthquakes on Loihi this past week, including 31 of magnitude 4.0 and above on the Richter scale in the last three days, the strongest quakes ever recorded from Loihi. 
The quakes have prompted Harry Kim, the Civil Defense director of Hawaii County, which encompasses the Big Island, to warn residents to head for higher ground immediately if they feel an earthquake. A quake of 6.8 could generate a local tidal wave in 15 minutes with no time for sirens or emergency broadcasts. 
Mr. Kim noted that the magnitude of the quakes from Loihi had been increasing, with one as high as 4.9 on Tuesday, and with no past experience to guide them scientists and geologists cannot predict Loihi's next move. 
Loihi is nearly two miles high, but its peak is still 3,000 feet below the ocean's surface. Scientists studying Loihi predict that in 100,000 years it will surface and form the next Hawaiian island. 
Island residents are accustomed to coping with threats of tidal waves caused by earthquakes across the ocean, but it is rare to be threatened by possible tidal waves of local origin, which would have little or no warning. 
Loihi is probably the most studied underwater volcano in the world, but at present all its activity is unmonitored. 
The University of Hawaii's Hawaiian Undersea Geo-Observatory plans to lay a 20-mile cable from Loihi to land, providing electrical power for monitoring instruments. Officials hope to have the line in place by February. 
The lab also has a three-man submersible research craft with video cameras and robotic arms, designed for jobs like placing monitoring instruments on Loihi, but it is busy on another project on the other side of the island. 
"We were lucky not to be there if the summit of Loihi is covered with lava," said Dr. Fred Duennebier, a volcano observatory official, "but unlucky to be missing all that's going on down there. No one has ever witnessed an underwater eruption, and we sure would like to." 

*
July 28, 2002, Sunday 
Hawaiian Lava Draws Crowds Despite Danger 
Glowing lava set trees afire and oozed into the ocean before dawn today as thousands of spectators braved Kilauea Volcano's scalding spray to witness the spectacle. 
The display is the most dangerous exhibition of volcanic activity from Kilauea since 1995. Since the lava flow began on May 12, it has triggered one major fire, burning more than 3,600 acres. 
Scientists from the United States Geological Survey's Hawaii Volcano Observatory reported that the breakout of lava today crossed the Chain of Craters Road and cascaded into the sea on the east side of the Big Island. Officials say up to 2,500 people a day have been flocking to watch.. 
''Conditions change rapidly,'' said James Gale, a guide for Volcano National Park. ''It's really very powerful to see something like this face to face.'' 
Flights to Hilo are heavily booked, and car rental agencies on the island report having few vehicles. Park rangers say cars have been backed up from the flow for two miles. 
The rangers have warned visitors that the volcano can be deadly. The lava creates acidic and potentially harmful steam plumes and undermines the lava crust, which can collapse. 
In November 2000, two hikers died after they apparently were overcome by fumes where the lava enters the sea. In October, a woman fell to her death in Kilauea's caldera. 
No buildings or major roadways have been threatened by the eruption. A Global Positions Satellite system is monitoring the rise of the lava, which could signal explosive activity. 
Seismic activity began increasing in the area in June with a ''fairly high level'' of earthquake activity, the scientists reported. 

*
April 1, 2000, Saturday 
Volcano in Japan Erupts a 3rd Time in 2 Days 
DATE, Japan, Saturday, April 1 -- A volcano in northern Japan erupted twice on Saturday, a day after it roared to life and sent a spectacular plume of molten rock and ash billowing two miles above the crater and rolling down the snow-quilted slopes. 
Mount Usu ejected smoke and brightened the sky before dawn today, and erupted again a few hours later. 
''Volcanic activities are intensifying and even larger eruptions than the previous ones are highly likely,'' said a spokesman for Japan's meteorological agency, Toshimitsu Niibe. ''We just don't know exactly how soon that will happen.'' 
Ash dusted silent, evacuated villages near Mount Usu after the major eruption on Friday, its first in 22 years. The only other noise came from sirens screaming warnings and ambulances and police cars cruising in search of damage. 
There were no reports of damage or injuries. More than 11,000 people evacuated from communities at Usu's base after the earth began rumbling earlier this week spent Friday night in rescue centers as officials warned that it was too early to say danger had been averted. 
Farther from the volcano, people streamed into the streets and climbed to rooftops to watch the towering cloud that blossomed from the eruption. Some snapped photographs. 
But those in the nearby city of Date who were not looking out a window might barely have known that Mount Usu was erupting. 
''I didn't feel anything; I didn't hear anything,'' said Norimichi Nagao, who works for the city of Date on Japan's northernmost main island of Hokkaido. ''I didn't even know that there was an eruption until I saw it on television.'' 
Snow fell Friday night, and the military was called in because of concerns about the possibility of landslides or mud slides caused by melting runoff. After Usu's last eruptions, which began in 1977 and continued into the next year, two people were killed and 200 homes were destroyed in mud slides. 
Fears also remained that Usu could spew a deadly mix of gas and rocks -- called a pyroclastic flow -- that races down slopes and incinerates everything in its path. 
Prime Minister Keizo Obuchi said that evacuees might have to stay for a while at makeshift centers set up in school gyms and community halls. The government will consider building temporary housing if that is the case, he said. 
About 51,000 people live in Date and several smaller towns near Usu, located 475 miles north of Tokyo. Experts had predicted the eruption because of increased seismic activity that began earlier this week. 
In Date, the eruption under clear blue skies became more of a public spectacle than a threat. After days of small but constant earthquakes and high-level warnings, many residents were ready. 
While Date was spared ash fall by winds that blew debris from the eruption in the opposite direction, other places were less lucky. Cars coming in from other areas around the mountain were covered in dust. Two other towns near Mount Usu, Abuta and Sobetsu, were silent and empty, with nearly all their residents evacuated. 

*
December 19, 2000, Tuesday 
40 Miles From Mexico City, Volcano Spews Rocks and Ash 
By TIM WEINER 
MEXICO CITY, Dec. 18 -- A volatile volcano outside this capital of nearly 20 million people erupted with plumes of lava tonight, hours after tens of thousands of people living near the volcano ignored the government's pleas to evacuate. 
Just after nightfall, glowing rivers of molten rock suddenly leaped and plunged from the 17,800-foot summit of Popocatepetl, the second-highest volcano in North America. The plumes were monitored by television cameras keeping a vigil. 
President Vicente Fox said the volcano had thrown rocks more than six miles from its crater. He said he had sent 2,400 soldiers and police officers to evacuate eight villages under the volcano. ''We remain at maximum alert,'' he said. 
Servando de la Cruz, a volcanologist at the National Autonomous University of Mexico, said the eruption was at first glance potentially the biggest in centuries. The lava dome inside the volcano's crater had more than doubled in size since Sunday, growing to nearly 500 million cubic feet, civil defense officials said. There was no immediate danger to the capital, they said. 
But there are also few scientific data to predict the behavior of a major eruption inside Popocatepetl (pronounced poh-poh-kah-TEH-peh-til, which means smoking mountain in Nahuatl, the indigenous language of Mexico). 
''It's like a pressure cooker,'' said the Interior Minister, Santiago Creel. ''It could lead to a situation the likes of which we've never seen.'' The volcano has not erupted with any great force since 1924. 
Popocatepetl's last catastrophic eruption was perhaps 1,000 years ago, as far as scientists can tell. They think it has had three such eruptions in the last 5,000 years. Tonight, they said, might be the beginning of the fourth. 
For the last four days, the volcano has been spewing enormous clouds of ash and vapor, settling a fine gray film over Mexico City, less than 40 miles west, and threatening hundreds of surrounding communities. 
Officials have been imploring more than 40,000 people who live in villages within seven miles of the volcano's base to evacuate. But their alarms, broadcast through ringing church bells, blaring sound trucks and radio and television broadcasts, generally went unheeded. 
Mr. Creel said this afternoon that the government would not force people to leave their homes. Other officials said as few as 4,000 people, a tenth of the population asked to evacuate, had sought refuge in government shelters. 
Villagers were reluctant to leave their jobs, their crops and their cattle. And local shamans, who carry on a system of worship for the volcano that dates back at least to its last major eruption a millennium ago, said there was no danger. 

*
April 2, 2000, Sunday 
Eruption of Volcano May Be Lessening, Experts in Japan Say 
DATE, Japan, April 1 -- Although Mount Usu spewed fresh clouds of steam and rocks skyward today, experts said that at least for now the worst had been avoided. 
The volcano, on the northern Japanese island of Hokkaido, first erupted on Friday. The second major eruption, in the early hours today, sent tremors through nearby villages. 
Throughout the day, small eruptions sent white clouds of steam into the air, and by late afternoon about eight craters had formed on the mountain, venting pressure that had built up beneath the surface. 
More than 5,000 evacuees camped out in school gymnasiums and other buildings fearing that their homes and businesses could be destroyed if the volcano blew its top. 
But Hiromu Okada, a professor at Hokkaido University, said that was unlikely, at least for now, noting that the new craters had formed on the sides of the mountain, away from the summit. The eruptions so far, he said, had been ''steam explosions'' caused by underground water being heated by magma. 
''If the present conditions continue, it will look very much like the 1910 eruption,'' Mr. Okada said. On that occasion, 45 craters formed on the mountain, but the top failed to blow and activity subsided after about three months. 
Experts had feared a repeat of the volcano's last eruption, in 1977, when it erupted from the summit, spewing lava and superheated gas and causing great damage to the surrounding hot spa resort area. 

*
April 1, 1997, Tuesday 
Volcano in Montserrat Is Kicking Up Again 
OLVESTON, Montserrat, March 31 -- Authorities put residents on heightened alert today as Montserrat's rumbling volcano spilled hot rock and ash over its southern flank and tossed an ash cloud 10,000 feet into the air. 
The latest activity at the Soufriere Hills volcano coated the evacuated capital, Plymouth, with a thick layer of ash and forced authorities to reimpose a nighttime evacuation of the town of Richmond Hill, just to the north of Plymouth. 
The fast-moving rivers of superheated rock and sulfurous gases reached about two miles down the mountainside and altered the landscape in the White River valley, damaging a couple of popular tourist spots, said Angus Miller, a scientist at the Montserrat Volcano Observatory. 
The activity occurred nearly a year after some 4,000 residents were evacuated from Plymouth and other towns at the south end of the British colony. The Soufriere Hills volcano burst to life in July 1995 after nearly 40 years of virtual dormancy. 
Scientists said the ever-growing dome of volcanic material contained 64 million cubic yards of rock and ash and remained very dangerous. 

*
February 7, 1997, Friday 
WEEKEND DESK 
Volcano! Lava! Help! Where's Grandma? 
By JANET MASLIN 
Mount St. Helens, call your agent. Maybe you have the snow-capped, lava-spewing look of this season's hottest movie stars. Volcanic action is poised to arrive in a big way, first with ''Dante's Peak'' and then with ''Volcano,'' a latecomer that at least has an ad slogan (''The Coast Is Toast'') better than its title or timing. On the other hand, on today's evidence, one neo-Pompeii picture could be quite enough. 
''Dante's Peak'' does prove that even if volcanic eruption is not the most exciting of disasters, it's definitely the messiest to clean up. Hot rocks, earthquakes, landslides, acid-polluted water and billowing black clouds all contribute to this film's efforts to demolish a sweet little mountain town in the Pacific Northwest. The special effects are suitably catastrophic, though they aren't much more clever than the computer tricks that turn up in beer commercials these days. 
Picturesque Dante's Peak has a miniskirted mayor (Linda Hamilton), the best espresso east of Seattle and a citation from Money magazine for being America's second most pleasant small town. (A good insurance policy would have come in handier.) It also has a Ferris wheel, a marching band and a special Pioneer Days Festival luring lots of vulnerable citizens out of doors. Probably none of this has anything to do with Mother Nature's decision to wipe the place off the map. 
''What do you think the odds against an eruption are here?'' asks one volcano expert. ''A thousand to one?'' Of course you can bet the price of a movie ticket that the odds are lower. So it's only a matter of time before the film's picture-postcard landscape goes berserk. Nasty as this might be in reality, here it's just an occasion for vicarious excitement, by-the-numbers destruction and the occasional flash of demented bravado. As the ''Twister''-type team of volcano-busters observes about a fatally unlucky colleague, ''At least he got to see the show.'' 
There is the faint but welcome suspicion here that somebody is half-kidding. That somebody is Leslie Bohem, who wrote the screenplay and also did time in the Holland Tunnel with ''Daylight'' and Sylvester Stallone. Though directed by Roger Donaldson with too much emphasis on humorless action-movie hyperbole, ''Dante's Peak'' is written as something of a genre parody, right down to the young couple who pick the wrong place to go skinny-dipping early in the story. No sharks in the mountains? How about hot springs that are really hot? 
The movie's mild-mannered action hero is Harry Dalton (Pierce Brosnan), star vulcanologist. (''You mean like Dr. Spock, I mean Mr. Spock?'' he's asked.) First seen in a prologue dodging torrents of flaming glop, Harry is a seasoned veteran. His career has taken him ''wherever there's a volcano with an attitude,'' which gives the film a chance to drop celebrity names like that of Mount Pinatubo. And he has seen tragedy: ''Her name was Marian. We worked together. She loved volcanos.'' Poor Marian should have thought twice about that. 
As the action begins, Harry is alerted to danger signals in Dante's Peak area and sent to investigate. ''Just up here to check on your mountain, that's all,'' he explains, hoping to keep the populace calm. Actually, there's precious little cause for alarm. It takes the film an awfully long while to deliver any reason to flee. 
Instead, much time is spent on the tepid flirtation between Harry and Rachel Wando (Ms. Hamilton), who serves up cappuccino when she isn't running Dante's Peak. A subplot involves Rachel's spry ex-mother-in-law, who is the volcano-hugging type and won't come down from her mountain home even when the mountain threatens to blow its top. Rachel's two brave children are forced to rescue their grandma. This is an excuse both to give the film some child appeal and to send red-hot, computer-generated lava bursting into Grandma's log cabin. 
''Dante's Peak'' proves a bit too macabre to qualify as fun for the whole family, since Grandma eventually falls into an acid lake with extremely unfortunate results. Harry is also injured, as indicated by a sickening shot of protruding bone. But in a movie that hews as closely as possible to the best-loved cliches of disasterdom, there's at least one guaranteed bit of good news. Nobody would dare leave burning, quaking, crumbling Dante's Peak without rescuing the Wando family dog. 
As ''Dante's Peak'' formulaically ushers in a new cycle of disaster films, it's time again to question the value of watching the planet going so spectacularly to pot. And there's also reason to notice that a movie can make a lot of noise, and pile on every plague short of locusts, without making much of a dent. Where are those locusts, anyway? Probably coming to the multiplex for summer '98. 
''Dante's Peak'' is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). It includes the above-mentioned grisly touches. 

DANTE'S PEAK 

Directed by Roger Donaldson; written by Leslie Bohem; director of photography, Andrzej Bartkowiak; edited by Howard Smith, Conrad Buff and Tina Hirsch; music by John Frizzell; production designer, Dennis Washington; produced by Gale Anne Hurd and Joseph M. Singer; released by Universal Pictures. Running time: 112 minutes. This film is rated PG-13. 

WITH: Pierce Brosnan (Harry Dalton) and Linda Hamilton (Rachel Wando). 

*
December 12, 1996, 
Alaskan Volcano Erupts in a Plume of Ash 
A volcano near the tip of the Alaska Peninsula has erupted, hurling volcanic ash high into the atmosphere. 
Pavlof Volcano, 590 miles southwest of Anchorage, began shooting ash above 15,000 feet on Tuesday. The increase in activity prompted the Alaska Volcano Observatory to increase its concern level to red, the top of its scale. 
The volcano's latest round of activity began in mid-September and at one point sent an ash cloud to 30,000 feet. King Cove, the nearest town, is 30 miles south of the volcano. 
Monitors installed around the volcano began reading sharply higher amounts of seismic activity in the 8,262-foot peak, said Terry Keith, a scientist in charge of the observatory. The increased seismic reading convinced scientists that there was enough energy in the volcano to hurl ash to 25,000 feet, Ms. Keith said. 
Pavlof is one of the most active volcanoes in the Aleutian volcanic arc, with nearly 40 eruptions since 1790. Some lasted one to two days and others continued sporadically for months. 
*
June 18, 1996, Tuesday 
Volcano Eruption Darkens New Zealand Sky 
AP
WELLINGTON, New Zealand, June 17 -- A volcano on New Zealand's North Island spewed molten rocks into the air like "thousands of bright red skyrockets" today, blotting out the sun with an eight-mile-high plume of steam and ash. 
The eruption occurred six days after scientists said that volcanic activity on the 9,176-foot snowcapped mountain had subsided after months of rumbling. The volcano, Ruapehu, last erupted in September. 
Witnesses said the eruption began this morning when the volcano shot steam and ash eight miles above its crater. That was followed by a huge explosion of gas and debris. 
"The top of mountain was glowing with huge bursts of pink, red and yellow light," Dennis Vater, a nearby resident, told Radio New Zealand. "Molten rocks were thrown from the crater and rolled down the sides of the mountain." 
A TV3 cameraman, Paul Heard, said the ground shook violently and continuously at a hotel at the base of the mountain and a loud rumble could be heard. Hot debris flew high into the air like "thousands of bright red skyrockets," he said. 
Ash several inches deep blanketed the immediate area and fell over farms and forest as far as 70 miles north of the peak, which is in Tongariro National Park. National Radio said residents in some towns shoveled "wheelbarrow loads of coarse sand-like pumice ash" from sidewalks and driveways. 
There were no reports of injuries or major damage around the mountain, a popular skiing area, 140 miles north of the capital, Wellington. 
-------------------- 
Mapping Vesuvius 
ROME, June 17 (Reuters) -- Scientists seeking to unlock the secrets of Mount Vesuvius will rattle one of the world's most famous, and potentially deadly, volcanoes next week with eight tons of high explosives. 
Through a series of controlled blasts, researchers hope to create a three-dimensional image of the inside of Vesuvius, which towers over the Bay of Naples in southern Italy. The volcano's most famous eruption was in 79 A.D., when it killed 16,000 people and buried the cities of Pompeii and Herculaneum beneath a sea of molten lava and ash. It erupted again in 1631, claiming an estimated 18,000 lives. Its most recent eruption was in March 1994, when it spewed ash over a wide area. 
Scientists are brushing off questions about tempting fate. "There is no, absolutely no danger to the population," a leader of the project, Dr. Giovanni Ianacone, a volcanologist at Naples University, said in a telephone interview. "There is not the slightest chance it could trigger an eruption." 
Single shots of 550 to 1,765 pounds of explosives will be set off from Saturday to July 1 at 14 bore holes on the slopes of Vesuvius and as far away as the Sorrento peninsula to the south. 
Blasts of compressed air will also be shot into the submarine lower reaches of Vesuvius from a French research ship in the Bay of Naples. 
Secrets that scientists hope to unravel include the thickness and position of the hard crust inside Vesuvius, which holds back a layer of molten rock about six miles down. 
"We want to understand what Vesuvius will be like when it wakes up," said Dr. Paolo Gasparini, another scientist. 
About 200 scientists and researchers from Italy, France and Switzerland are involved in the project. 
*
January 23, 2002, Wednesday 
Volcano-Scorched Congo City, Ground Shaking, Returns to a Nervous Kind of Normal 
By MARC LACEY
GOMA, Congo, Jan. 22 -- One of the first babies born since the eruption of Mount Nyiragongo last week was named Volcano by a woman who was still in search of two of her other boys. Men with sledgehammers helped build a road across the mound of lava dividing the town. In these and other ways, life began returning to normal in Goma today as residents lined up by the thousands for the first food and water that many had received in days. 
But normal is a relative term for Goma's people, who have lived through a long string of miseries in recent years. Through dictatorship and disease, rebels and Mother Nature, the people have endured. 
Nowdays the town is controlled by the Rally for Congolese Democracy, whose mission to overthrow Joseph Kabila, the new president, has been dramatically upstaged by Mount Nyiragongo's eruption. 
''Not everybody supports us,'' acknowledged a rebel commander who identified himself only as Frank. ''If people are starving, they don't want us. If they're O.K., they do.'' 
The eruption and its aftermath have indeed left people desperate and near-starving, which may explain why the rebels have been eager to coordinate the relief effort since the eruption last Thursday. Rebel leaders have been negotiating with the United Nations over the best place for feeding sites and camps, and they have rebuffed attempts by Mr. Kabila's government in Kinshasa to get involved in the recovery. Mr. Kabila has offered aid as long as it stays out of the rebels' hands. ''We're not going to let him use this tragedy for his political propaganda,'' said Moïse Nyarugabo, the rebels' justice minister. 
Many here express weariness with political machinations and the violence that can result from them. 
''Government workers go months, even years, without getting paid,'' complained an elderly civil servant who has lived through many of Goma's past travails. ''Everyone's jobless. Life has become so difficult.'' 
The man said he wanted the rebels gone, but after he said it he insisted that he not be identified in print. ''If you say the wrong thing in Goma it can mean trouble,'' he said. 
Trouble here dates back at least to the early 1990's, when Mobutu Sese Seko ruled the country, which during his years in power was called Zaire. The only properly paved road in Goma in those days ran in front of Mr. Mobutu's lake-front residence. 
In 1994, a wave of a million Rwandan refugees swept across the border into Goma to flee ethnic massacres. The refugee camps set up in Goma would later become the scene of violent clashes and cholera. 
Eventually, Rwandan soldiers swarmed into Goma to root out extremists among their refugee countrymen. When that was over, Rwandan-backed rebels intent on overthrowing the government of Laurent Kabila, Mr. Mobutu's successor, took over the town. Since Laurent Kabila's assassination in January 2001, the rebels' animus has been directed against his son, Joseph. 
''Goma has lived through a longer series of incredible crises than any other place on earth,'' said Paul Stromberg, an official with the United Nations refugee agency. 
Late last week, in the hours after the volcano poured a lake of lava on much of its downtown, Goma became a ghost town. Today, money-changers holding bricks of Congolese francs reappeared, and families moved back into the homes that Nyiragongo had spared. 
The first vehicle to cross the lava since Thursday was a white four-wheel-drive of one of the many relief organizations here. 
Still, the ground continued to shake in tremors that cracked walls and rattled nerves, and volcano experts rushed into the night to check into reports that a second volcano near Goma may be rumbling. The United Nations evacuated one of its buildings tonight when a particularly vigorous rumble tore through the town. 
A boy roaming around the mass of lava in the center of town found two charred skeletons that appeared to be those of children. 
The bones were in the kitchen of an engulfed house, indicating that the two huddled together as the lava filled the room. The death toll is still unknown, but this was probably the first of many such finds. 

*
January 22, 2002, Tuesday 
Dozens Die in Congo as Lava Sets Off Blast at Gas Station 
By MARC LACEY 
GOMA, Congo, Jan. 21 -- As Goma continued to struggle with the aftermath of the huge flow of lava that leveled great swaths of the town, a gas station exploded in its center this morning, and dozens of people who had been looting gasoline were believed to have died. 
Witnesses said large groups of people had been emptying gasoline from above-ground storage tanks into plastic jugs, which they planned to sell on the roadsides. But one looter accidentally spilled the gas, which was ignited by some nearby lava. 
Huge billows of black smoke hung in the air, a reminder that the lava, although hardened on the surface, remained fiery hot inside. 
''We were just trying to get enough money to eat,'' said Jacques Barhishindi, who was taking gas with a friend who died in the explosion. 
With many homes destroyed and businesses at a standstill, residents grew increasingly desperate for provisions. Children on a main street were spotted looting food from a downtown store. Hundreds converged on a church when word spread that food was available there. 
Dieudonné Wafula, a lone Congolese volcanologist who lives in this remote area of Central Africa and another volcano expert hired by the United Nations said the volcano did not appear on the verge of erupting again. But the conditions on the ground in Goma remained volatile. 
Mr. Wafula had predicted the eruptions of Mount Nyiragongo months before last week's fury, and he had tried in vain to warn the world. 
''People doubted me,'' he said today before taking a United Nations delegation on a helicopter tour of Nyiragongo. ''I explained it to the government. They said, 'Yes, we'll try to do something.' But it took too much time and the volcano didn't wait.'' 
The United Nations, which is coming under some criticism here for a sluggish response to the disaster, said the World Food Program would begin large-scale food distributions in Goma as soon as it was sure that the city was safe. Two camps set up in Rwanda to feed refugees have attracted relatively small numbers as most displaced Congolese have returned to their battered town. 
''When the W.F.P. starts providing food, it's like saying, 'Come on back. It's safe,' '' said Ross Mountain, a United Nations emergency relief coordinator sent to Goma by Secretary General Kofi Annan. 
Although the United Nations remained cautious about returning to Goma, Jacques Durieux, a French volcano expert hired by the United Nations to assess the danger of Nyiragongo, said today that the volcano did not appear to pose any immediate threat of eruption. He said the post-eruption earthquakes that Goma has been experiencing and the gas seeping from the lava were not significant threats either. 
Still, he said his recommendation would be that nobody live at the foot of any active volcano. ''In my opinion, the present eruption is over but you always have to be ready for another eruption,'' he said. 
Mr. Durieux, who is the leader of the Group for the Study of Active Volcanoes, based in Lyons, France, singled out Mr. Wafula for praise. Both scientists had made numerous trips to Nyiragongo over the years to inspect the volcano up close. ''He's very good,'' Mr. Durieux said of his Congolese colleague. 
Mr. Wafula said most experts believe that a volcano such as Nyiragongo will erupt when the lava inside reaches a certain level. But Mr. Wafula said his inspections of the crater had shown that although that level had not been reached, Nyiragongo was still poised on the brink of eruption. Monitoring Nyiragongo is a challenge because the seismological observation stations around the volcano have been looted during Congo's civil war. 
Mr. Wafula, 48, who studied physics in graduate school but has spent decades as a volcano watcher, relies on a mix of science and intuition. There had been earthquakes in Goma last fall and earlier this month. Each time the ground shook the volcano was also rattled and dark smoke emerged. When he came to the conclusion that Nyiragongo would not hold its lava much longer, Mr. Wafula sounded the alarm. 
In March 2000, he held a conference in Goma on Nyiragongo and its sister volcano, Nyamuragira. Last April, he informed the rebels who run this town that Nyiragongo was dangerous. He wrote a commentary on the subject for the local newspaper several weeks ago. He also sent e-mails to colleagues as recently as three days before Nyiragongo finally did what he said it was going to do. 
''Professors are really looked up to here, and we had all heard his predictions,'' said Fidel Bafilemba, a local government worker. ''But nobody believed him.'' 
*
January 21, 2002, Monday 
Warily, Residents Return To Lava-Scarred Congo City 
By MARC LACEY 
GOMA, Congo, Jan. 20 -- There are now two Gomas, divided by a rugged, scorching mass of hardened lava. The only way across is by dancing on hot coals, lifting each foot fast enough that it doesn't burn. 
Thousands of displaced Congolese returned here today from Rwanda. They fled after the worst volcanic eruption Africa has seen in a quarter-century began on Thursday. 
Rwandan authorities opened two camps for them well away from the disaster, but most of those who left town chose not to stay at the camps, preferring to suffer through the aftermath on home soil. 
One of the many who danced across the lava today stumbled on a jagged edge and fell forward onto his palms. He screeched in pain, lifted his hands to his face and inspected the burns. 
A young boy yelled, ''I don't want to go! It's hot!'' as his mother, her arms full and her back carrying another child, pushed him onto the lava that spewed out of Mount Nyiragongo last week onto the streets of Goma. 
Another refugee carried a live chicken along, dangling it by its legs. The bird squawked loudly whenever its head bounced across the lava. 
Ali Twaha, 25, whose house miraculously survived a lava flow that stopped near his front door, lifted one of his boots to show a partly melted sole. ''You feel the heat going up your legs,'' he said. ''You feel it in your whole body.'' 
The sizzling stone is just one of Goma's hazards. Toxic gases seeping through the lava sting the eyes and clog the lungs. Refugees roam in search of scarce food and water. Criminals raid abandoned houses and shops after dark. Fresh-faced rebels armed with automatic weapons, participants in the seemingly endless Congolese civil war, are the only government in sight. 
''Oh, Goma has suffered so,'' said a nun who roamed the lava in her habit in search of needy souls. She had arrived from Kigali, the Rwandan capital, to evacuate 100 children whose orphanage had been surrounded by the river of lava. That the building withstood the heat was a success story, she said, but one of far too few in Goma. 
What was more common was the fate of Agate Kahambu, 25, who sat a few feet from the steaming lava, sucking in the gas and daring the volcano to strike again. Her house had been buried, enveloped by the innards of Nyiragongo, one of two active volcanoes in the region. 
''If it wants to come and get me, then come and get me,'' she said. ''My house is already gone. It's covered with rock. I'm not going to let the volcano chase me away.'' 
It was despair, not defiance, that filled the face of Awete Emilie, a grandmother whose house was stolen by Nyiragongo. She showed a visitor the place where she used to live, now just a mound of black rock. ''It came this way and then kept coming,'' she said, gesturing toward Nyiragongo, miles away in a thick post-volcano haze. ''We ran for our lives when it was coming right at us.'' 
The United Nations, which has pulled most of its staff out of Goma, joined the rebels in urging the displaced Congolese to stay away from town for now. Volcano experts flown over the site by the United Nations have said that the intense shaking of the ground that still occurs regularly in Goma indicates that the volcano's activity may not be over for now. 
Goma is rebel-held territory, meaning the town's only authorities wear camouflage and are more adept at gaining ground than rebuilding on it. Members of the rebel group, Rally for Congolese Democracy, have called on aid organizations to ratchet up their relief effort. But the rebels have rebuffed offers of aid from the Congolese government in Kinshasa, the capital, that they are fighting. 
''This is a natural disaster,'' insisted the rebel commander, Adolph Onusumba Yemba. ''It has nothing to do with politics and has nothing to do with the war we are fighting.'' 
Rebel leaders had urged residents to stay put in the early hours of the eruption, switching gears only when it became clear that the ash spewing from Nyiragongo was the real thing. Today, the rebels urged residents of Goma to stay out of the city, a call that fell largely on deaf ears as tens of thousands of people returned for a glimpse at the destruction. 
The World Food Program began feeding refugees at two camps in the western Rwandan towns of Nkamnra and Mudende, more than 10 miles from the Congolese border. Only about 5,000 people had arrived at the camps as of today, a small portion of the estimated 300,000 people initially forced from their homes. But a United Nations spokeswoman, Laura Melo, said the food might draw more to the camps in the days ahead. 
''We are trying to sensitize people to go to the camps,'' Ms. Melo said. ''That will be the best place to be. But these people are victims of a natural disaster, and we can't prevent them from going home if they want to.'' 
Some refugees said they feared they would be worse off living in the camps, with their often crowded conditions and disease, than if they returned to Goma. Many have vivid memories of the dismal conditions and brutality of the camps in Congo for refugee Rwandans who streamed over the border nearby after the 1994 genocide in Rwanda. Refugees also complained that some Rwandans had rudely shooed them away when they first arrived. 
The question on the minds of many was whether Goma could recover from such a blow. 
There was ample evidence that the devastated town that has endured so much would somehow go on. 
In the rubble caused by eruption last week, there were neat walls made of lava left over from even more devastating eruption by the same volcano in 1977. There were many people like Muhammad Mustaf, who, standing today looking at the destruction, vowed to remain in Goma until his last days. 
Mr. Mustaf had been in a hospital bed with malaria on Thursday when someone rushed into his room and told him to run. ''I was in a haze,'' he said. ''I didn't understand. Everybody was running and they told me to go.'' 
He was still sweating today, a mix of fever and the steaming rock. The hospital managed to survive but Mr. Mustaf said he preferred to recover on his feet, just in case Nyiragongo was not finished yet. 

*
July 24, 2001, Tuesday 
World Briefing | Europe: Italy: Lava Emergency On Mount Etna 
Italy declared a state of emergency in the province of Catania, Sicily, after lava from Mount Etna volcano edged closer to homes and a tourist center in Nicolosi, at about 6,500 feet elevation on the volcano's south flank. Black ash forced residents to use umbrellas to walk outside and caused officials to close the nearest airport. The volcano began sending out ash and lava July 13 after the area was jarred by hundreds of small earthquakes. Etna springs to life every few months and its slopes are closely monitored. The volcano's last major eruption was in 1992. 

*
May 11, 2001, Friday 
National Briefing | Northwest: Oregon: Bulge Detected Near Volcanoes 
A significant bulge in the earth's crust has developed over the last four years near volcanoes in central Oregon, but it is not clear whether it could mean a volcanic eruption any time soon, geologists said. The bulge, 9 to 12 miles across and about 4 inches high, was detected by satellite radar, said Willie Scott of the volcano laboratory at the United States Geological Survey in Vancouver, Wash. The bulge is near the Three Sisters, a trio of volcanoes at the center of the Cascade Range. 

*
January 2, 2001, Tuesday 
Watchful Eyes On a Violent Giant 
By TIM WEINER
MEXICO CITY, Jan. 1 -- Popocatepetl, Mexico's magnificent and mystical 17,945-foot peak, has been called the world's most dangerous volcano. Nearly 30 million people live within view of it, most of them in Mexico City, 40 miles west, and Puebla, 30 miles east. More than 300,000 people living in the danger zone directly under the volcano regard it as a living thing, a magical man-mountain, a geological god giving rain and rich land. On Dec. 18, when it erupted in what some scientists said was its biggest explosion in a millennium, they came to regard it with a little more fear than awe. 
But they now have more than a little science to mix with their magic. Since 1994, when it awakened from a seven-decade slumber, Popocatepetl (which is pronounced poh-poh-kah-TEH-peh-til and means ''smoking mountain'' in Nahuatl, the indigenous language of Mexico) has become the world's most elaborately monitored volcano. Seismologists, geologists, volcanologists and mathematicians have been watching and recording its every tremor. As a result, scientists were able to predict within hours that it was about to blow on Dec. 18, and officials evacuated more than half of the people in the valleys below. 
And therein lies a tale. 
On average, a volcano erupts somewhere about once a week. Ten or 12 eruptions a year have the potential to kill people. Two or three a decade threaten mass death and destruction. And 75 percent of the biggest eruptions in the past two centuries came from volcanoes never known, in human history, to have erupted before. 
Scientists understand a lot about volcanoes. They know the earth has three layers: its dense core, its partly molten mantle and its crust, broken into 16 major tectonic plates, moving almost imperceptibly, a few inches a year. 
And they know that all along the Pacific coast, from Alaska to Chile, the plates that underlie the ocean are scraping under the land. At the edges of these plates, rivers of molten rock, called magma, bubble toward the surface of the earth. Magma that reaches the surface is called lava, and volcanoes are built from accumulated lava, rock, ash and dust. In hot spots along rifts in the plates, the magma can erupt with volcanic force. 
But there is much they do not know about why volcanoes erupt when they do, and as a result volcanoes remain a lethal threat to those who live around them. 
Since May 18, 1980, when Mount St. Helens erupted in Washington State, causing 57 deaths, volcanoes have killed nearly 30,000 people, driven more than one million people from their homes, and caused billions of dollars of damage. More than 25,000 people were killed in 1985, when the Nevado del Ruiz volcano in Colombia erupted after months of restless rumbling, sending rivers of mud and ash called lahars down on the town of Armero. 
The deaths could have been prevented, scientists say, if the volcano's warning signs could have been detected, analyzed and transmitted in time. 
Volcano monitoring systems do exist. After Mount St. Helens, scientists from the United States Geological Survey began devising portable volcano monitoring instruments that could be set up together in 70-pound early-warning systems. They could chart changes in sulphur dioxide and carbon dioxide in the air, the tilt and temperature of the ground, the most minor earthquakes and tremors, and debris flows that would otherwise go undetected. Transmitters to send the data -- with radio, antenna and a year's power supply -- were packed into nine-gallon steel drums. The system provided a continuous, real-time history of seismic activity. 
The system was originally intended for the Pacific Coast ranges of California, Oregon and Washington, but after Nevado del Ruiz, the United States Office of Foreign Disaster Assistance, an arm of the Agency for International Development, asked the geological survey to set up a global program. The result was the world's only rapid-response team of its kind, the Volcano Disaster Assistance Program. 
''The truth of the matter with volcanoes is that no one knows what will happen next,'' said Dan Miller, a research geologist who is the chief of the program, which has headquarters in Vancouver, Wash. ''Volcanoes are not that consistent and not that well understood. But what happened at Nevado del Ruiz didn't need to have happened.'' 
When a volcano becomes active, the team can move quickly (though only when invited by another nation's government, through a formal request to the State Department). It now has worked at 19 volcanoes in 15 nations. Within days, it can install monitoring equipment, detect magma flowing to the surface and forecast eruptions with reasonable accuracy. 
''Forecasting exactly when an eruption will occur is very difficult,'' Dr. Miller said. ''And eruptions can go on for months and even years.'' 
When Mount Pinatubo in the Philippines reawakened on April 2, 1991, after lying dormant for more than 500 years, Philippine scientists called in the disaster assistance program to install a monitoring network. The sensors gave clear warning of a catastrophic explosion, which came two months later. By that time, 75,000 people, including 18,000 members of the American military, had been evacuated. 
''We were lucky,'' Dr. Miller said. ''The volcano was threatening big, destructive eruptions and it produced them a few days after the signs were clear and accurately interpreted. Tens of thousands of lives were saved. And the entire effort cost less than $1.5 million.'' 
Things went less well at Montserrat, in the British West Indies, in 1995. The team installed its monitoring network at the Soufriere volcano, watched magma moving up to surface and transmitted the danger signs. But it was more than two years before the volcano truly exploded, by which time the force of the warnings had dwindled. At least 19 people died and the capital, Plymouth, was destroyed by lava and ash. 
In December 1994, Popocatepetl, which is geologically similar to the volcanoes in the Cascade Range in Washington and Oregon that the United States geological team knew best, became active with a series of eruptions after lying dormant since 1927. 
Scientists from the National University of Mexico and the National Disaster Prevention Center (known by its Spanish acronym, Cenapred) already had installed four seismic sensing stations on the volcano's flanks. But they asked for help. The result has been, by most volcanologists' accounts, one of the world's best volcano monitoring networks. 
Working together, the Mexican and United States scientists set up a device called a tiltmeter to detect infinitesimal shifts in the slope of the volcano, which becomes swollen when magma rises into it. A tiltmeter works like a carpenter's level, with a bubble in the middle that sets off an electrical impulse when it shifts. The one at Popocatepetl is so sensitive that if you had a 3,000-foot bar of steel, and slipped a nickel under one end, the tiltmeter at the other end would detect it. 
The Mexicans and the United States team installed a special seismometer, an acoustic-flow monitor, that could pick up a small lahar flowing by. They had specially equipped surveyors' rods, enhanced by lasers, to detect bulges in the volcano. 
They deployed other sensors to pick up ground movements along with shifts in gases, electrical and magnetic fields that flow from subterranean movements of magma. They had special detectors to listen for the phenomena called harmonic tremors, earth vibrations set off by moving magma for reasons no one really understands. They also had, it should go without saying, a network of Popocams, or video cameras hooked up to the Internet, watching over the smoking mountain. 
All of this was woven together at Popocatepetl in a system called Earthworm, which allows instant acquisition and sharing of data over the Internet. Two weeks ago, as the volcano began showing signs of a big eruption, Cenapred scientists could sit in a control room on the southern edge of Mexico City and watch it. 
''These guys are operating at the state of the art,'' said Jim Luhr, director of the Smithsonian Institution's Global Volcanism Program. 
But their work would mean nothing if the people who live under the volcano did not get their message or ignored it. 
When a warning goes from Cenapred through radio and television it reaches most of the 217 towns in the danger zone within minutes. And in the 24 towns that radio cannot reach, a satellite telephone alerts local leaders, who ring church bells to sound the alarm. 
Alejandro Rivera Dominguez, a seismologist affiliated with the Center for Disaster Prevention at Puebla University, described the 300,000 people around Popocatepetl as mostly poor, many of them farmers who are especially reluctant to leave their fields and herds behind. To them, he said, the volcano is a sacred symbol that cannot be fathomed by science, a rain god and a giver of good harvests. 
The authorities, he said, have learned to speak and think of Popocatepetl with a more folkloric, more magical language in order to better communicate warnings to the villagers, Mr. Rivera said. 
That may be. For nearly a week before Popocatepetl's spectacular nighttime explosion on Dec. 18, the alarms had gone out from Cenapred to the countryside, the church bells had rung. Thousands heeded the warnings, but thousands resisted, saying they were less fearful of lava and ash than the possibility that soldiers and policemen sent to protect them would loot their homes instead. 
''We've been holding out for a week now,'' said Jose Felipe Pacheco, 26, a farmer from Santiago Xanitzintla, one of the communities closest to the crater, as he left his home reluctantly, under pressure from army officers, more than eight hours after the first huge eruption. ''Our belongings, all that we have, and have earned through such sacrifice -- and to think that we could come back to an empty home, losing everything you've worked for. 
''Leaving is in my best interest,'' he said. ''But staying is also in my best interest.'' 

*
July 25, 2000, Tuesday 
Reports of a Dead Mars Are Greatly Exaggerated; Red Sands Show Marks of Recent Water and Lava 
By WILLIAM J. BROAD 
The first spacecraft to probe Mars ended up shattering ages of myths and delusions. This was no sister planet to Earth lush in lakes, canals and vegetation, as some astronomers had imagined after seeing elusive dark patches and white ice caps that seemed to change with the seasons. 
Instead, Mariner 4, which flew past Mars 35 years ago this month, snapping 22 close-up photographs, revealed a wasteland. 
Scars from cosmic bombardments riddled its surface, implying that Mars had undergone no erosion by air, seas and churning rock over the eons. It had no detectable magnetic field, meaning its core was cooler and less dynamic than Earth's and that its surface was lashed by radiation. And its atmosphere was found to be so thin that any liquid water would quickly vaporize. 
''In jarring contrast with our expectations, we had just discovered a Mars incredibly inhospitable to life,'' recalled Bruce Murray, then a young planetary scientist and later director of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, which engineered the interplanetary trek. 
Other probes suggested that eons ago Mars was warm and in some places wet. But the planet's white poles today turned out to be mainly dry ice, not water. And slowly, grudgingly, the planet came to be seen as dead geologically and probably devoid of living things. 
Now, rather suddenly, Mars is showing new signs of life. The announcement last month that the orbiting spacecraft known as Mars Global Surveyor had photographed regions said to have been cut in modern times by running water is but one of the surprises emerging from recent detective work. 
Scientists, examining Mars rocks hurled to Earth in upheavals, have found signs that moving water changed the chemical makeup of the surface terrain in recent eras, and they have concluded that the Martian crust harbors up to three times as much water as previously thought. 
Provocatively, experts scrutinizing the close-up photographs of Mars have also discovered hints of modern volcanism and fiery eruptions. That suggests the interior of Mars is warmer than previously thought and may help explain how deep ice can suddenly melt to form surface flows. 
''All this opens up a much more interesting and diverse planet than people expected,'' said Dr. William K. Hartmann, an astronomer at the Planetary Science Institute in Tucson, Ariz. It was his nine-person team that reported evidence of recent volcanism. 
''It's the discovery,'' he added, ''of an active Mars.'' 
The implications of the new findings are being debated, and scientists urge caution because the assessments are often tentative. Some doubt flowing water explains the yawning cuts, for instance, and instead suggest other fluids or flows of mud or hot gas. 
But most agree that Mars is showing new signs of heat and vitality, as well as posing a new set of riddles. 
''The evidence now says it's not dead,'' said Dr. Bruce M. Jakosky, a planetary scientist at the University of Colorado. ''But we don't comprehend what we're seeing yet, even though we know it's true.'' 
Like fuzzy visions of Mars through early telescopes, the hints of flowing water and heat are fueling dreams of the ultimate discovery: aliens, not fossils from some long-departed era, but living ones prospering in secluded habitats, perhaps underground, tiny and microbe-like. 
''It's not crazy to ask if there's oases where life might still exist'' close to the Martian surface, said Dr. Andrew H. Knoll, a Harvard biologist who studies early life on Earth and its possibility elsewhere. 
But he cautions that hunting for such oases will be difficult because Mars is so far away and the exploratory agenda of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration is already so full and slowed by recent setbacks. ''It takes time to do these things,'' Dr. Knoll said. ''It has to be step by step.'' 
Dr. Kenneth H. Nealson, an astrobiologist at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, said aliens were rising on the Mars agenda. 
''I had pretty much given up on life near the surface,'' he said. ''I was skeptical about whether in my lifetime we could access any area that would have any possibility of life.'' 
The new findings, he said, ''change the game.'' 
''Shallow drilling is now something we should look into,'' he added. ''It's a very exciting debate.'' 
Mars is the most Earthlike planet in the solar system and a close neighbor, being the next world out. It gets less sunshine than Earth and is relatively cold. Its polar caps and changing seasons, resulting from an axial tilt like that of Earth's, have long made it a world of dreams. 
The astronomer Percival Lowell claimed he had found evidence of artificial canals and intelligent life, even though his telescopes showed Mars as little more than a blurry dot. In 1894, he founded the Lowell Observatory near Flagstaff, Ariz., and for more than a decade charted dark markings he saw as waterways enveloped by dense foliage, somewhat like the Nile. 
In the century since then, Mars probes like Mariner 4 have let scientists make millions of close-up observations and discoveries, including dry river beds hinting at past torrents. 
The $300 million Mars Global Surveyor, built by NASA, has been studying and photographing the remote world for more than two years even as two sister probes last year vanished while approaching the planet. 
The probe has found dust devils, carbon dioxide snow and signs of old magnetic fields suggesting the early core was highly active. 
The findings have tended to come out piecemeal in papers and forums, often with little fanfare, so that even Mars experts are struggling with the tide. ''I can't keep up with it,'' said Dr. Maria T. Zuber of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, who is on a global surveyor science team. 
Last year, Dr. Hartmann of the Planetary Science Institute in Tucson and eight colleagues at Cornell, the United States Geological Survey and other institutions reported that Mars was apparently alive geologically, based on the freshness of some surfaces. 
The team examined close-up surveyor images of volcanoes and lava flows and found that some had a distinct lack of cratering. All the solar system's planets and moons exhibit impact craters from a steady rain of cosmic debris, with Earth's scars mostly erased by ages of erosion. On any body, the absence of craters implies active resurfacing. 
For Mars, the team focused on the extraordinarily wide mouth of a very young volcano, Arsia Mons. The huge peak, located just south of the Martian equator, is one of the largest known volcanoes, its summit 5.6 miles higher than the surrounding plains and its summit crater, or caldera, 68 miles wide. 
The team found that craters were far rarer in the caldera than on the volcano's outer flanks, suggesting that Mars had been active as recently as 40 million years ago -- a snap in the planet's life of five billion years -- and perhaps even more recently. 
''The crater statistics that we report here suggest that volcanism is continuing on Mars in current geological time,'' the scientists wrote Feb. 18, 1999, in the journal Nature. The team included Dr. Michael H. Carr, one of the world's top Mars experts. 
In an interview, Dr. Hartmann said the finding overturned what had been the conventional view for decades. 
''There were a lot of people who thought all the volcanism died out two or three billion years ago,'' he said, adding that molten rock near the surface might explain the evidence of recent water flows. 
At a news conference on June 22 in Washington, NASA made public the signs of flowing water, previewing a paper in the June 30 issue of Science by Dr. Michael C. Malin and Dr. Kenneth S. Edgett of Malin Space Science Systems in San Diego, which built the surveyor camera. 
Images of 120 gullies, pits and valleys, they said, suggested that flows of water had occurred in recent geologic time, perhaps just hundreds, thousands or millions of years ago, instead of the planet's early days. The springlike seeps and flows, they added, ''could even be contemporary.'' 
Close-up images of steep hillsides show gullies and channels ending in fanlike deltas of soil and rocks, suggesting the flows formed the deposits. These features are young, the scientists said, because their surfaces are smooth and light in color, compared with old regions pocked with craters and covered with dark dust. 
The scientists found no link between the sites and known volcanic regions of Mars. Most flows lie in southern latitudes, some not far from the south pole. The provocative sites are seen as having no relationship to warming from sunlight since they often lie in shadows, making them very cold. 
Previously, scientists had estimated that the planet's lingering internal heat might have kept water liquid in rocky strata a mile or more below the dry Martian surface. In contrast, Dr. Malin and Dr. Edgett said the new evidence suggested that liquid water might lie as close as a few hundred feet down. 
Dr. Laurie A. Leshin, a geologist at Arizona State University, recently came to similar conclusions by analyzing a Mars meteorite. She measured the concentration of the hydrogen isotope deuterium, a component of so-called heavy water, in the meteorite and concluded that the Martian crust had two to three times the amount of water previously thought. 
''It's a tiny meteorite with big implications,'' she said in an interview. ''There's every reason to think we could find water in the Martian crust today.'' 
In a different Mars meteorite, Dr. Timothy D. Swindle of the University of Arizona and seven colleagues found evidence that water had changed the rock's composition in relatively recent geologic times. ''It's the youngest evidence for water,'' he said, adding that all the emerging signs suggest it now lies close to the surface. 
In theory, the new findings are increasing the possibility that Martians of one sort or another may be clinging to life on the dying planet. 
In the past decade or so, as scientists have discovered a remarkably rich microbial fauna dwelling deep in the Earth's interior, miles down, they have theorized that Mars may be similar. After all, its interior is thought to be wet and warm, potentially a kind of microbe heaven. 
Dr. Thomas Gold, a distinguished space scientist at Cornell, has proposed that the solar system might harbor as many as 10 alien biospheres hidden in deep rocky strata, with Mars at the top of his list. The problem for human explorers is that such regions are frustratingly out of reach. 
Now, the new evidence of surface water and heat is stirring excitement about the prospect of more accessible habitats and of humans' some day making contact with living Martians. 
''If you can imagine episodes in which water comes to the surface and stays for a while, then you have the possibility that any life would have a chance to grow and express itself,'' said Dr. Nealson of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory. ''To me as a biologist, that's very interesting.'' 
Scientists agree that the discovery of even a single extraterrestrial microbe would be a watershed, shedding light on how life began and the odds of its arising elsewhere in the universe. 
''This is exciting,'' Dr. Jakosky of the University of Colorado said of the water evidence and its life implications. ''This is big news.'' 

*
January 27, 2002, Sunday 
WEEK IN REVIEW DESK 
The World: Hell on Earth; An Inferno to Make Dante Shudder 
By MARC LACEY 
GOMA, Congo -- GOMA has a charming lakefront, delightful mountain views and a temperate climate. But none of that changes the fact that it is one of the most miserable places on earth. 
The hundreds of thousands of Goma residents who outran a volcanic eruption here on Jan. 17 acted surprisingly nonchalant as they carted their possessions back across the still-steaming lava to the houses the volcano spared. In Goma, a border city of 400,000 on Congo's eastern edge, disasters are a part of life. 
Goma is refugee central, the way station for desperate Rwandans and desperate Congolese fleeing war on one side of the border or the other. When refugees start moving in this area of the world, they do so in huge numbers, hundreds of thousands strong, and they run for their lives through Goma. 
Goma is also disease central, where cholera breeds in the grim, overcrowded living conditions. Thousands died during an outbreak in 1994 after a million Rwandans entered Goma to escape advancing guerrillas from the Rwanda Patriotic Front. Health officials have reported scattered cholera cases in the days after the volcanic eruption, but no epidemic yet. 
Goma has become war central as well, home to one of the rebel groups seeking to unseat the Congolese government in Kinshasa. The complicated war, a decade in the making, has ground Goma's economy into the dirt and turned everyday living into a chore. The Rally for Congolese Democracy is barely tolerated by the residents of Goma, but the rebels are the ones with the guns. 
As if all that is not enough, Goma is volcano central, the largest city in an area of Africa dotted with volcanoes. Mount Nyiragongo is the one that spewed its innards on Goma a week ago. Its smaller neighbor, Mount Nyamulagira, has also been known to erupt. Goma has been covered by lava in the past -- the most devastating instance was a major eruption in 1977 -- and it will most likely be covered again. 
The relief workers who arrived en masse in Goma's lava-filled streets to help dig out this modern-day Pompeii wondered aloud whether Goma was finished. Would people finally move away from this star-crossed city that forced them to endure so many woes? Could Goma possibly exist with a lake of hardened lava covering a third of the city, drowning much of its business district and thousands of its homes? 
At first, it appeared that Goma might have reached its end. As lava blanketed the streets, residents grabbed whatever possessions they could carry in their arms, strap to their backs or balance on their heads and left Goma behind. 
The humanitarian organizations based in Goma picked up and ran as well. Even the United Nations military observers trying to keep the Congo's civil war from engulfing the city hopped into their trucks and shifted into high gear. 
Goma, it seemed, had put its inhabitants through its last disaster. 
But as is so often the case in disaster spots, people returned. Those in Goma really had little choice. Their city is surrounded by dense jungles. They do not feel welcome among the Rwandese. To them, the volcanoes have a mythical dimension. Angry spirits live inside, they say. The eruptions are in the hands of the gods, not something the people of Goma can control. ''If it wants to come and get me, then come and get me,'' said Agate Kahambu, a woman who lost her home in the eruption. ''I'm not going to let the volcano chase me away.'' 
AMID its misery, Goma is still a place where babies are born (one named Volcano entered the world last week), where children go to school (although many of Goma's teachers have left for better jobs in Rwanda), where commerce is conducted (although even some of the city's most successful businessmen dress in second-hand clothes). 
Goma's residents stayed no more than a day or so across the border in Gisenyi, Rwanda, where they first fled the advancing lava. Against the advice of the United Nations and the orders of the rebels, they trudged back to Goma while the lava was still hot. 
They climbed over it, a treacherous daredevil act in flip-flops with a heavy water jug or mattress or overstuffed suitcase balanced atop their heads. They began chopping away at the lava and selling cooking oil and sacks of sugar and other staples on the side of the road. The unemployed men returned to their normal corners. The women began running their damaged households -- an even more difficult exercise than before. 
The World Food Program, a United Nations relief agency, at first supplied sustenance to volcano victims in camps set up miles away from Goma in the Rwandan countryside. But when few people came for the handouts, the agency faced a dilemma. If it served food in Goma, it might send the message that the city, which continued to experience earth tremors and explosions, was safe again. 
But if did not serve food in Goma, it would ignore the fact that the vast majority of the hungry people who had fled had gone back, willing to give it another shot. 
The Congolese rebel group says it has no intention of giving up its fight. Maybe there will be more refugee crises in Goma's future. Maybe more disease will break out. Experts expect more turmoil from the volcanos, without a doubt. ''Nyiragongo is taking a small rest,'' said Dieudonne Wafula, Goma's one and only volcanologist. 
For now, though, Goma has returned to the way it is in between headline-grabbing events. It is a miserable place that 400,000 or so people call home. As a local government worker, Fidel Bafilemba, put it last week: ''This place is hell, absolute hell, but it's also where I live.'' 

*
November 20, 2001, Tuesday 
OBSERVATORY 
By HENRY FOUNTAIN
A Volcano's Added Layer 
As volcanoes go, Mount Vesuvius is relatively small. But it packs quite a punch, as the unfortunate residents of Pompeii and Herculaneum learned in A.D. 79. 
Now, Italian and French researchers have found that Vesuvius represents the tip of what might be described as a volcanic iceberg. Underlying the volcano is a massive layer of molten rock. 
This magma layer extends at least 150 square miles and is located about five miles underground. The researchers, who described the finding in the journal Science, discovered the layer by analyzing seismic waves generated by small explosions created by air guns on a ship in the Bay of Naples. The researchers say that knowledge of the layer won't help predict when Vesuvius will erupt again (it last did so in 1944), but it does point to areas that can be monitored for signs of an approaching eruption. 

<#NP>
*
November 26, 1999, p.A20 
Vulcanologist was pioneer in the use of Landsat satellite images: Created new technology 
Peter Francis, who has died of a heart attack aged 54, was among the foremost vulcanologists of his time. His fascination with volcanoes began during an expedition to the Andes from Imperial College, in London, in 1970. On his return, he started a series of geochemical studies of Andean volcanic rocks to shed light on the physical processes by which volcanic deposits are generated. Struck by the vastness of the geologically unmapped Andes, he went on to lead the field in the use of images recorded by Landsat satellites. He was the first to recognize that the mountain group of Cerro Galan, in northwest Argentina, is of volcanic origin. He realized that the group was a "resurgent caldera" overlying a site once occupied by a 20-mile wide chamber of molten rock within the crust. To prove this, he led an Anglo-Argentinian expedition to Cerro Galan early in 1981. This received military support and was the last joint operation between Britain and Argentina before the Falklands War. The year before, Mount St. Helens in Washington had surprised experts by erupting with a sideways blast. Satellite images of other volcanoes enabled Mr. Francis to show that many had suffered similar collapses. He applied similar reasoning to spacecraft images to help to unravel the types of volcanic processes that had occurred on the planet Mars. He once spent three nights in a Peruvian jail after photographing some Mars-like sand dunes a little too close to a military base. As the 1980s wore on, a new generation of Landsat satellites came into service, showing finer detail and registering the short wavelength infra-red part of the spectrum. This enabled Mr. Francis to make the discovery in 1985 of an infra-red glow within the summit crater of the Lascar volcano in northern Chile. Until then, this volcano had not been recognized as active, but a series of eruptions soon ensued. Thus was born the modern era of eruption detection and early warning from satellites. Its development owed much to Mr. Francis. Peter William Francis was born on Dec. 28, 1944, in Mufulira, Northern Rhodesia (now Zambia), where he spent his early years. The family returned to England and Peter studied geology at Imperial College. He was awarded a doctorate in 1969. In later years, realizing that gases emitted from volcanoes carry vital information about what is going on inside, Mr. Francis concentrated on ways to measure the composition of these gases. He secured funds to develop a new kind of instrument called a Fourier Transform Infra-red Spectrometer, and led a European project on volcanic gases. Mr. Francis was the driving force behind the gas monitoring performed in Montserrat during the recent volcanic eruptions on the island. He had three tours of duty there as senior scientific advisor. He formed several fruitful collaborations with scientists in America and became deeply involved in the planning for NASA's Earth Observing System satellites. During the 1990s he successfully argued the case for a new Open University course in which the geological evolution of the Earth is taught in conjunction with the history of the atmosphere and biosphere. Mr. Francis became director of teaching for the Open University's Earth Sciences department in 1996, and in 1997 was awarded the title of professor of vulcanology. In America, he was a senior visiting scientist at the Lunar and Planetary Institute at Houston, Texas, from 1981 to 1989, and later a visiting professor in the Planetary Geosciences Division of the University of Hawaii. Peter Francis became known to a whole generation of geology and volcano enthusiasts through the publication of his Penguin book Volcanoes (1976). Away from his work he was an accomplished sailor, and collected antiquarian volcanic books and prints. In 1991, Peter Francis married Mary Brown (nee George), whom he had met a year earlier in Washington where she was working at the British Embassy. 

*
November 27, 1999, p.A16
Ecuador: Volcano blows stack 
QUITO - Ecuador's capital was blanketed by ash yesterday after the Guagua Pichincha volcano exploded, blowing off its dome and spewing smoke and debris 15 kilometres into the air. Schools were closed, and people were told to wear surgical masks, gloves and glasses to protect themselves if they had to go outside. 

*
11, 1999, p.F3
Hawaii: Volcano pay-per-view 
Honolulu's Diamond Head crater
The new year will bring a new charge for tourists visiting Honolulu's Diamond Head crater -- $1 (US) for each walk-in visitor and $5 for each car. Until now, there has been no fee to visit the landmark known formally as Diamond Head State Monument. Each day more than 3,000 visitors enter through a tunnel in the crater wall, and many hike to the top of the 760-foot summit for a panoramic view of Waikiki and the coastline. 

*
January 21, 2002, p.A1
'I thought we were all going to be cooked'. Volcano displaces 500,000. Quebecer joins Congolese in racing against the lava.
Finbarr O'Reilly 
A resident walks amid the wreckage of corrugated tin houses inundated by a lava flow in the Congolese city of Goma. Tens of thousands of displaced people returned to Goma yesterday, three days after an eruption of Mt. Nyiragongo destroyed nearly half the city.; See related story "Early return creates new crisis in goma" by Matthew Green on page A12.
KINSHASA - Trapped between the advancing flow of lava and thousands of desperate refugees as she fled Africa's most violent volcanic eruption in 25 years, Karine Morency of Trois- Rivieres, Que., was afraid she might not escape. ''I thought we were all going to be cooked,'' said Ms. Morency, 30. She works for the United Nations in the town of Goma in the eastern reaches of the Democratic Republic of Congo, formerly Zaire. This weekend the sky was glowing red over Goma, reflecting the fires sparked by tongues of molten lava that flowed through the town and poured into Lake Kivu, turning its fringes to coils of steam. ''Everyone was terrified for their lives -- people were jumping on our car and pulling off the mirrors and antennas,'' she said last night. ''I think at that point they were more dangerous than the volcano. There were soldiers with guns who could have just taken our car. We tried to give one or two people a lift, but when we opened the door hundreds tried to swarm in. Other people were trying to give us their babies to take to safety.'' Safely back with friends in the Congolese capital, Kinshasa, en route home to Canada, last night she danced to Abba, cheered ''I survived the volcano!'' and recounted her escape. ''The smell was awful,'' said Ms. Morency. ''Like burning tires.'' She only had time to grab a few items, among them a souvenir lump of black lava rock she put in a Ziploc bag as she joined thousands of panicked refugees crossing into Rwanda. More than 500,000 people fled the mountainous area along the Congo-Rwanda border after Mt. Nyiragongo erupted on Thursday, but many have now begun to return in search of food and water. The eruptions have stopped, but tremors are still shaking the earth. Much of the town lies under a metre or more of lava that is still smouldering as it cools. Humanitarian agencies are struggling to deliver emergency relief to the Central African region, which has been torn apart by civil wars since the Rwandan genocide of 1994. More than half of Congo, including Goma, is controlled by rebel factions backed by either Rwanda or Uganda. There have been recent moves toward peace, but uncertainty still stalks much of the country, where more than two million people have died from hunger and lack of access to basic health care during the past three years. ''Working in a place like Congo, you expect some heavy things to happen from time to time," Ms. Morency said. "But at least with a drunken soldier you can negotiate. You can't negotiate with an exploding volcano.'' Ms. Morency, who expects to be home in Trois-Rivieres tomorrow, lost most of her belongings -- souvenirs from other missions, photographs, CDs and much of her wardrobe -- and had time to grab only one change of clothes and a stick of deodorant. ''I can't really be too upset about losing my things because I can buy new stuff in Canada this week," she said. "The people there have lost everything.'' A 1977 eruption of Mt. Nyiragongo killed 2,000 people, but the death toll this week stood at about 40. 

*
January 19, 2002, p.A16
Controversy erupts over France's fake volcano: 'The giscardoscope'
Hugh Schofield 

A watery sun breaks over the empty mountainside of the Auvergne, a crow caws, mist rises in wisps from the frost-laden earth -- and the sudden sound of a pile-driver interrupts the pastoral reverie. The finishing touches are being put on a project which next month becomes France's latest tourist extravaganza -- an attraction to rival EuroDisney. The name is Vulcania, and the theme: volcanoes. Ten years in the making, the park is the inspiration of Valery Giscard D'Estaing, the 75 year-old former French president who is also president of the Auvergne regional council. For him -- and for probably most inhabitants of this part of central France -- the project is a chance to promote the local economy, and to generate international interest in the Auvergne's principal attraction, its spectacular chain of extinct volcanoes. But others are less kind. They say it is a white elephant meant only to flatter the vanity of a man famous for his self-esteem. They say it has cost too much and will attract the wrong type of tourist. They have called it the Giscardoscope. The 60 hectare site, which opens on Feb. 21, is still strictly off-limits to visitors or journalists, but its promoters say it will be an "educational and recreational journey into volcanoes and the sciences of the Earth." Crowned by a 28-metre cone, two-thirds of Vulcania is actually underground, and visitors will descend a massive crater before enjoying a variety of simulations and visual presentations. There is a volcanic garden and a vibrating cinema with one of the world's biggest projectors. Mr. Giscard D'Estaing has made it clear he wants the site to become a world centre for vulcanologists, and extensive areas are also set aside for research. Situated among the volcanic peaks on a former military base 16 kilometres outside the city of Clermont-Ferrand, the project has been welcomed by local business interests, who are eager to arrest the region's gradual decline as a tourist destination. "Vulcania has given us a real boost," said Jean-Pierre Bara, mayor of the nearby town of Royat. "Of course we are delighted that it's opening." But despite the hype, there are serious questions about the project's cost, its purpose and its impact. The Green party has been doggedly opposed to Vulcania, arguing that it is perverse to construct a theme park on the subject of volcanoes in the centre of a natural park that actually contains them. "Auvergne's greatest asset is 'green' tourism," said Green party euro-deputy Danielle Auroi. "Our image is the purety of the volcanoes. Volvic mineral water and all that. So what's the point of building fake volcanoes in the middle of real ones?" Environmentalists question whether a remote and poorly connected area like the Auvergne can attract the half-a-million visitors Vulcania is banking on every year, and they fear there will be growing pressure to put up roads, hotels and restaurants to draw them in. There is also the cost. Originally budgeted at US$50-million, Vulcania has ended up at more than US$142-million -- most of it borne by the local tax-payer. What opponents enjoy most, though, is accusing Mr. Giscard D'Estaing of "folie de grandeur." "In France everyone down to the village mayor wants to leave his mark, and this is Giscard's," said Marcel Breugnot of the Movement to Save the Auvergne Volcanoes. 

*
January 19, 2002, National Edition, p.A14
Molten rock covers town in Congo: Fast-flowing magma swallows the town of Goma, killing dozens and sparking a mass evacuation: Lava flows continue
Matthew Green
A Goma resident walks on hardened lava spewed by the 3,470-metre-tall Nyriagongo, one of the most active volcanoes in Africa. Red Cross staff said the neighbouring town of Gisenyi is also at risk. 
GOMA, DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF CONGO - Hundreds of thousands of panicked people fled the town of Goma yesterday after molten rock poured from the Nyiragongo volcano, killing dozens of villagers and engulfing everything in its way. Thousands more were thought to be marooned on a hill outside the town on the borders of the DRC and Rwanda, cut off by two flows of lava. United Nations officials warned that the Rwandan town of Gisenyi, where many had taken refuge, was also threatened by the volcano, which was continuing to erupt, albeit at a slower rate. The 3,470-metre-tall Nyiragongo suddenly erupted into life on Thursday, sending streams of molten lava down its steep slopes and through villages. The lava moved so fast many of the inhabitants did not have time to escape and were buried under the fiery onrush. It quickly rolled into Goma, home to about 300,000 people, and now covers large parts of the town. Yesterday, the United Nations said the eruption was continuing and could also threaten Gisenyi, which is only about 10 km from the volcano. There could also be underwater explosions and pollution if the magma, the lava flows, reach Lake Kivu. One eruption had opened up a one-km-long crack in the side of the volcano and three major lava flows were running through Goma and nearby villages. One was also heading for Gisenyi. Two staffers from the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) who managed a swift visit to Goma reported no reduction in the lava flow and seismic activity. "We can estimate that in the next few hours there will be maybe half-a-million people on the roads. It's a very likely, plausible estimate," said Juan Martinez, an ICRC spokesman. Mr. Martinez said many people had already fled toward Ruhengeri further to the east and Bukavu in the south, following directions given by local radio. "The problem we have now is that, given the uncertainty of the situation, we cannot bring people to Gisenyi if the town has to be evacuated tomorrow," Mr. Martinez said. The United Nations was now suggesting people head for the greater safety of Ruhengeri. Trudging through a fire-scarred landscape draped in smoke and mist, refugees clutching bedding, live chickens and water cans formed a tide of human misery. Some were travelling eastward into Rwanda, while others fled in boats to Bukavu on the lake's southern tip. "Fire is burning everything," said Lieutenant-Colonel Alain Pereira, a Senegalese officer with a UN observer force in Goma as part of efforts to end a civil war. "We were in the car park, then suddenly we felt our car rocking as if it was in the sea," he said, describing one of the tremors that rocked Goma yesterday morning. Nyiragongo, part of a chain of eight volcanoes lying along the borders of Uganda, Rwanda and the DRC, is one of Africa's most active and most deadly. Formed on a fault line connected to the African Rift Valley, it has erupted every decade in recent history. Because Nyiragongo's lava lake is high and the slopes of the volcano are steep, escaping lava flows at remarkable speeds. Legends in the area speak of an angry spirit trapped in the volcano and venting its wrath in eastern Congo. In Goma yesterday, only the wealthy district of Himbi appeared to have been spared. More hilly than the rest of the town, its slopes served as a barrier to a lava flow at least two km wide. As night fell yesterday, flames lit up the evening sky and fresh tremors shook the nearby hills and the lakeside port, now virtually reduced to a ghost town. Streams of lava two metres high continued to pour through the streets. Gaping holes wrought by intense heat opened in the ground and molten rock reduced roads and buildings to fiery ash. "The smell of sulphur is everywhere, there are tremors every 10 minutes," Desire Bukasa, a UN radio controller, said. "There are fissures opening up in the town which billow smoke. People are scared." In the DRC capital of Kinshasa, the Health Ministry asked the international community for immediate assistance, including shelters, blankets, drinking water and sanitation facilities. "This is going to be a human catastrophe," said an official of the UN contingent in Goma. "We have to find them shelter, put them up in camps. There's no electricity, no running water." Florian Westphal, a spokesman in Nairobi for the ICRC, quoted colleagues in Goma as saying access was a big obstacle in relief efforts. "Our warehouse and workshop garages with seven trucks have been destroyed. The airport is unuseable and the port in Goma has been destroyed by an explosion," he said. "The water company is no longer operational, two out of three pumping stations are out of order." 

*
Early return creates new crisis in Goma: Agencies scramble to deliver aid as residents leave camps and flood into city devastated by volcano: Tremors continue Matthew Green National-Post National Post, January 21, 2002, National Edition, p.A12 Goma; Democratic-Republic-Of-Congo News; Restricted World Reuters 20020121 Short GOMA, DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF CONGO - Aid plans for up to half a million Congolese left homeless and hungry by a volcanic eruption were in disarray yesterday as most refugees returned to their ruined city to try to salvage homes amid the rubble. GOMA, DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF CONGO - Aid plans for up to half a million Congolese left homeless and hungry by a volcanic eruption were in disarray yesterday as most refugees returned to their ruined city to try to salvage homes amid the rubble. Ignoring the risk of further eruptions, tens of thousands streamed back into Goma yesterday, picking their way across swaths of still steaming lava to see what remained of their houses since a cascade of molten rock swept through the town on Thursday. Aid agencies said the unexpected mass return to the lakeside port of Goma had turned plans for food and water distribution on their head. "It seems that nearly all the displaced people have returned to Goma," Alison Preston of the World Vision agency said. "That has produced a whole new crisis, because we have half a million people returning to only a fraction of what Goma used to be. There is massive overcrowding, the streets were just thick with people." Two lava flows from 3,469-metre Mt. Nyiragongo and a third flow from a recently formed volcanic crater have destroyed about 40% of the city of 500,000 people. Relief workers had hoped to assemble most of the refugees in designated camps across the Rwandan border, where they said aid distribution would be easier and safer. But Goma's residents, braving violent earth tremors and carrying everything from babies to bicycles, made their way back over streets flooded with crusted lava, saying they would rather be weak and hungry at home than in Rwanda. "We didn't feel welcome in Rwanda. We spent two days without food, without water, they refused to change our money," said Chabani Shani, 42, one of the lucky ones to return and find his home still standing. The United Nations initially estimated 45 people were killed when Mt. Nyiragongo erupted on Thursday and said it was extremely concerned the volcano could erupt again. A strong earth tremor rattled Goma yesterday, underlining fears among volcanologists that more seismic activity was still possible, while fumes from the lava could pose a health hazard. Families trudging home through the wasteland strewn with blackened trees and twisted roofs were hungry, thirsty and weak and relief workers said water was a pressing concern. Desperately thirsty, many sought relief by drinking from Lake Kivu despite fears that lava pouring down its banks since Thursday may have poisoned its waters. "The big question since so many people are coming back is how are we going to deal with the water situation," said Jean Jacques Simon, a worker for the International Committee of the Red Cross in Goma. Water from the lake was being analyzed to assess the extent of the pollution. Meanwhile, a local aid agency was providing chlorine that would at least prevent cholera, but could have little impact on volcanic pollution. Aid agencies said they were reassessing their whole operations. "The issue now is we have got the food, blankets and water ready to go, but if we begin a distribution [in Goma] it would just be a disaster," Ms. Preston said. "We are putting into place a contingency plan, so we can begin distribution as soon as possible, that will be safe and will get to the right people." She said several hours of rain yesterday evening had further complicated Goma's predicament, turning mounds of dried lava into a grey slurry which emanated steam heavy with sulphur. Many people were still sleeping outdoors. Rubera Manywa, an official of the Rwandan-based rebel group that controls Goma, said it would be better for refugees to stay on the Rwandan side of the border until experts declare the volcano safe, but added they were free to choose. The Congolese government in Kinshasa, at war with the rebels since 1998, said it planned to send a delegation of ministers and aid worth US$1.5-million, in the first government visit to Goma since civil war divided the former Zaire. British and U.S. aid consignments were expected to arrive in the coming days, and Germany, France and former colonial power Belgium all promised money and supplies. But it seemed a modest effort in view of the scale of the emergency. Mt. Nyiragongo, rated one of Africa's most dangerous volcanoes, appeared to have stopped pumping lava yesterday, although fires continued to burn in some parts of the city. But despite the misery awaiting them in their home town, residents seemed determined to stay. Aime Okito, 20, walked for an hour from her waterless home in Goma to a tap by the border, but she was happy to return, despite the devastation. "Life over there is so bad," she said, nodding toward the Rwandan side of the border, before resuming her walk back towards streets filled with lava. 

*
January 22, 2002, p.A12
Looters killed in gasoline explosion: Scores die in Goma as lava ignites depot Adrian Blomfield and Tim Butcher
GOMA, Democratic Republic of Congo - Scores of looters were killed in the stricken Congolese town of Goma yesterday when a gasoline station exploded, apparently ignited by smouldering lava. A series of explosions sent fireballs high into the air and caused billows of dense black smoke that could be seen from kilometres away. The looters, some of whom had not eaten for four days after the eruption of Africa's most dangerous volcano, Mt. Nyiragongo, were trying to take the gasoline to sell for food. The station is located near one of the main lava flows, but the lava had cooled enough for people to walk across it. They were using plastic containers to retrieve the fuel and carry it away to be sold. Witnesses said as many as 100 people were inside the depot at the time and were engulfed by the flames. "There were many women and children inside, it was packed," said Kiza Barabara. "The only people who came out were two mothers and two children. Their backs were covered in burns." Adolphe Onusemba, President of rebel-held eastern Congo, said attempts to recover the bodies had been hampered by the fire. Periodic explosions sent huge fireballs 10 metres up. The smoke made it impossible to tell the exact loss of life even from close by. The latest disaster came as a series of earthquakes rocked the once-charming lakeside town. Western scientists are baffled by the shocks, which were more numerous and stronger than had been recorded in the region previously. At least one measured five on the Richter scale, sending people running out of homes they had just returned to after fleeing the river of lava that destroyed nearly half of Goma last week. Jacques Durieux, a French volcanologist flown to Goma by the United Nations, paid tribute to local experts who predicted last week's eruption four days before it happened. The monitoring system they used was destroyed in the eruption. "We have no explanation for the shocks and earthquakes although we think they are connected to last week's eruption," he said. "I spent a long time flying over the volcano today and I saw fractures on the lower slopes that were bigger than I have seen in this region." It appears that a series of earthquakes hit the region last week and at least two cracked the earth on the volcano, allowing its lava to flood out. Mr. Durieux could not rule out further and more devastating earthquakes in the region, which lies in the southern part of the Great Rift Valley, one of the Earth's fault lines between tectonic plates. 

*
January 24, 2002, p.A14
Under Nyiragongo: Africa's largest volcanic eruption in 25 years is a reminder Congo is unstable politically, as well as geologically 
Finbarr O'Reilly
GOMA, Democratic Republic of Congo - From the air, the trail of destruction left by a torrent of lava that tore through the city of Goma last week looks like a smouldering black scar against the lush green landscape of eastern Congo. In the lava-clogged streets that were once Goma's downtown core, the overpowering stench of methane seeping from the earth only adds to the idea that, from up close, the flow looks like a river of animal dung. More than four-metres deep in places and up to half-a-kilometre wide, this petrifying river has engulfed houses, businesses, vehicles and perhaps a quarter of the city, much of which is still smouldering after last Thursday's eruption of Mt. Nyiragongo -- Africa's largest eruption in 25 years. Anyone who risks stepping on to the blackened crust is enveloped in painful waves of shimmering heat generated by the glowing magma still visible underfoot. "At least it's a dry heat," jokes one sweating journalist. In some parts, molten lava flows beneath the brittle, razor-sharp surface while frequent tremors cause the ground to shift underfoot. A misstep could cost the unwary a foot or worse, as several people have discovered. Throughout the day, locals in flip-flops pick their way carefully across the lava, which had split the city in two. Bulldozers have opened up a lava road between the previously separated east and west halves of Goma. Many have lost everything they owned, which often wasn't much in this Central African country, rent by a three-year-old civil war that has involved at least six countries. "Before, we were at war and didn't have much, but now we have even less," says Aldolphe Sutani, a 27-year-old taxi driver whose home was incinerated. "I never thought the lava would reach the town, but when it did, it was everyone for themselves. All I have left is the clothes I'm wearing." As with many such disasters, nature is selective, destroying one building and leaving others untouched. Ushu Mehta, an Indian merchant, lost the lava lottery. Her pharmaceutical store, Depot No Problem, was destroyed, along with US$150,000 worth of stock. A shop two doors away stands unscathed. Ms. Mehta approaches a United Nations delegation touring the disaster site and tries in vain to sell them some medical supplies she has stored in the Rwandan capital, Kigali, a two-hour drive away. As she pleads, her lips quiver and tears well up in her eyes, perhaps because she has lost more than most. It's a rare show of emotion among a population that deals with loss stoically. Everywhere, people are picking up the pieces, hauling jerry cans of water and carrying scraps of corrugated iron on their heads to wherever they might build a makeshift shelter to keep the chill of night at bay. When it comes, nighttime offers a Dantesque scene. Haze shrouds everything and glowing pockets of fire or molten lava cast ghostly shadows as people drift through the wreckage. But those whose homes and families escaped the destruction have reason to celebrate. At La Maitraise bar, a bamboo hut with white plastic chairs and tables, colourful beer banners, a banana-leaf roof and dirt floor, Congolese music pumps loudly from distorted speakers and warm beer flows until morning. "If people keep reliving the images of disaster in their heads it could cause all kinds of psychological trauma," says Commandant Celestine Kwitonda, a soldier in the Rwandan-backed rebel army that controls much of eastern Congo, including Goma. "When a town is destroyed like this, people need to amuse themselves to create a distraction. It's pure escapism, but it works." Leaving the bar, the commandant agrees to take a journalist along for a midnight cruise. Day and night, the soldiers with rubber boots and AK-47s patrol the streets for looters who pry open metal bars on store windows in an attempt to steal whatever they can. The military shot several people in incidents immediately after the eruption, a reminder the area is as unstable politically as it is geologically. Analysts fear the natural disaster may be used as an excuse to derail the peace process aimed at ending the civil war between Rwandan- and Ugandan-backed rebels and the central government, which is supported by Zimbabwe and Angola. But the soldiers have more pressing concerns and stop to relieve themselves. Their urine vapourizes with a hiss as it strikes hot lava. Throughout the night, the ground heaves and buildings sway in the frequent aftershocks. Lying in bed, it is hard to enjoy a comfortable night's sleep for fear of what could still happen. People feel powerless to escape the humbling force of nature should it choose to unleash another wave of destruction. Irrational fears are made rational by recent events and there is no real comfort in the words of volcanologists who say the worst is probably over, at least for now. The international community is doing what it can to deliver emergency aid to Goma and the Nkamira refugee camp 30 kilometres inside Rwanda, where hundreds of thousands fled after lava spewed from fissures in Mt. Nyiragongo's slopes. Many have since returned to their homes in search of food and water, which was lacking across the border. Businesses that weren't buried under tonnes of lava are doing great trade. In the comfortable little hotels that offer scenic views of the Virunga chain of volcanoes, armies of humanitarian workers chatter on cellphones and are busy "organizing." But many UN workers seem more interested in holding meetings and organizing massive meals for themselves than in actually getting anything done. In a city where thousands of people have not had proper food or water for days, one senior World Health Organization official complained to the waiter that his steak was overdone, even though he had been told "it's a bit difficult for us to work a la carte. The vegetables left with the lava." Some aid is trickling through, but help is coming too slowly for frustrated residents who occasionally take their anger out on journalists. One photographer was stoned, others have been shouted at. But many locals smile warmly at foreigners as they show them around what is left of their city. There is the risk of additional eruptions, cholera and other outbreaks of disease, but a constant refrain among the inhabitants is that they would rather die on their own scorched soil than in the enemy territory of Rwanda. "We'd rather suffer at home than here," says Eric Mwakilongo, a 30-year-old refugee at the Nkamira camp. "This is not our place." Despite the dramatic aftermath and the lives it has ruined, the disaster isn't nearly as bad as first feared. Only 25% of the town has been destroyed, rather than 85%, although much of the commercial district is gone. The number of damaged homes is likely to be closer to 100,000, rather than 250,000, and 15 of the 20 clinics run by non-governmental organizations survived the eruption. Electricity and water are running sporadically in most neighbourhoods. "We will rebuild the town and tourism will slowly come back," says one hotel owner who watched lava flow between his home and his business, leaving both untouched. "The climate here is cool and people will come back again to see the volcano, Lake Kivu and the mountain gorillas. Look what the international community has done for Kabul and for Sarajevo. With a minimum of will, we could get things done here, too." A 1977 eruption of Mt. Nyiragongo killed 2,000 people, but the estimated death toll this week stood at 40. Witnesses said another 80 people were killed in a fuel dump explosion on Monday, but the figure was difficult to confirm. A week after the eruption, the story is drifting from the headlines and journalists are leaving the residents of Goma to the quiet tasks of their difficult lives, made even more difficult by a seismic twist of fate. As they go about rebuilding, they remain ever mindful of the restless giant looming above town. It may be another 25 years or more before the next major eruption. Or it may not. 

*
February 3, 2001, Toronto Edition, p.F6
St. Martin just a short boat ride away from other unspoiled Caribbean islands Neil Maghami
There's no better place to get bitten by the island-hopping bug than St. Martin. One popular outing is a day trip to scenic St. Barthelemy (known also as St. Barths or St. Barts; it's a French possession). St. Barths consists mostly of summer residences belonging to jet-setters with deep pockets and the main town, Gustavia, has a number of high end stores that cater to them. Another destination to consider is Saba, a tiny island under Dutch administration. Saba used to have an active volcano, but fortunately it retired some time ago. Tourists can explore Saba's rain forest and four small villages. One more contender for a side trip is Pinel Island, which lies inside Orient Bay, off the French side of St. Martin. It's an unspoiled gem of pristine beaches that locals probably would prefer to keep a secret. - Your hotel staff can help you arrange your side trips. 

*
March 26, 2001, p.A3
War of words erupts over tragedy. Galeras volcano disaster. Two authors dispute blame for expedition that left nine dead ; Row erupts over volcano tragedy. Author attacks scientist who led Galeras expedition. Two upcoming books dispute blame for volcanic experiment that left nine dead
Michael Higgins
Author Victoria Bruce  claims Stanley Williams a volcanologist, failed to take safety precautions during the 1993 Galeras expedition. Bruce and Williams give different accounts of the tragedy in two books. 
At 1.43 p.m. on Jan. 14, 1993, the Galeras volcano in southern Colombia erupted killing six scientists and three local hikers. At 1.43 p.m. on Jan. 14, 1993, the Galeras volcano in southern Colombia erupted killing six scientists and three local hikers. The scientists were part of a team led by renowned volcanologist Professor Stanley Williams and were conducting experiments when they were blown apart by the powerful blast. The three hikers, a father, his son and his son's friend, had gone up the volcano to see the scientists work. Next month, a new book launches a scathing attack on Mr. Williams and claims the tragedy could have been avoided. Author Victoria Bruce, a 34-year-old former science writer for NASA with a master's degree in geology, alleges Mr. Williams should have cancelled the expedition and also failed to enforce safety precautions that could have saved lives. But in his defence, Mr. Williams, an Arizona State University professor who also has a book about the tragedy coming out next month, says the allegations are nothing more than Monday-morning quarterbacking. Both authors received advances in the half-million dollar range; Ms. Bruce for the HarperCollins book No Apparent Danger and Mr. Williams for Surviving Galeras (Houghton Mifflin). Mr. Williams's team had arrived the morning of Jan. 14 and had descended into Galeras's crater. That afternoon, the volcano erupted sending black ash two miles up into the air. The publicity for Ms. Bruce's book claims it would show "how clashing cultures and scientific arrogance resulted in tragic and unnecessary loss of life." Ms. Bruce says on the Web site promoting her book: "At the time Williams led the expedition into the volcano, Galeras was showing signs of activity that appeared as long screw shaped signals on the monitoring equipment. (The Colombians call these "tornillos.") Similar signals had preceded an eruption of Galeras six months before. So there was data warning against the trip. And the night before the expedition, Colombian scientists voiced their concern about this data to Williams. But he didn't share this information with any of the scientists who he led into the crater the next day. "At the very least, it was Williams's responsibility to let the others know that there were dangerous signs. He didn't do that." Ms. Bruce is also scathing of the safety precautions. "Williams failed to take even the most basic safety precautions. As the leader of the trip, Williams was responsible for coming up with a safety plan in the event of emergency. He didn't do that. He also didn't instruct any of the group to bring safety gear on the expedition, and most of them went into the volcano without hard hats or adequate gas masks. They just hiked into an active volcano wearing Gore-Tex and synthetic fleece-garments that melted instantly when the victims were hit with super hot rocks from the eruption, causing third degree burns on most of the survivors. Also, several of the injuries and fatalities-including the skull fracture that Williams received-were caused by blows to the head that could possibly have been prevented by wearing helmets. One scientist said that the expedition was run like a 'Sunday walk in the park.' " Mr. Williams answers many of the criticisms on the Houghton Mifflin Web site advertising his book. "There is general agreement among geologists that we couldn't have known Galeras would blow when it did," Mr. Williams says. "In the days and hours before the eruption, Galeras showed none of the classic signs that a volcano is poised to blow. Galeras erupted four more times in 1993 before scientists eventually discovered that its blasts are preceded by small numbers of tornillos -- weak, long-lasting earth tremors that etch a screw-shaped pattern on a seismograph (tornillo is Spanish for screw). To our knowledge, Galeras is the only volcano in the world whose eruptions are preceded by so few tornillos." As for safety equipment Mr. Williams says: "Many of my colleagues that day had at least as much experience on active volcanoes as I did, so I trusted them to use their own judgment. Of the sixteen scientists on Galeras, only two chose to wear protective gear. This might seem surprising in retrospect, but keep in mind a couple of facts. At that time it simply wasn't standard practice for volcanologists to use lots of safety gear, except for gas masks, which many of us brought with us that day. "Given the massive trauma the dead scientists sustained at Galeras, I'm sure that hardhats and fire-retardant suits would not have saved a single life." Pulitzer Prize-nominated journalist Fen Montaigne, who co-wrote the book with Mr. Williams, claims: "There are people in volcanology who do not like Stanley Williams. Clearly, word got around that he got a whopping advance for this book. I think ... from the beginning [Bruce] was trying to prove that Stan was a bad scientist, that Stan recklessly led people to their deaths. ... She marshalled her facts in a prosecutorial war against Stan. But she doesn't make her case." Ms. Bruce's agent, Peter McGuigan, claims the accusation of finger-pointing is unwarranted. "The book is not about, 'Let's get Stan Williams,' " he says. 

*
May 5, 2001, Toronto Edition, p.G4
Former death zone a hot draw for tourists: Mount Pinatubo
Jim Gomez
THE PHILIPPINES - Nearly 10 years after Mount Pinatubo erupted in one of the past century's most violent volcanic events, tourists are trickling back to marvel at the devastation that killed hundreds and wiped out the Philippines' main rice-producing region. "This isn't really for the faint-hearted," says Mike Benneth of Dreamtreks, a small tour agency in Angeles City, near Pinatubo. "We cater to people with a taste for adventure." Dreamtreks and a few small travel firms started escorting the three-hour climb up the 1,445-metre volcano in 1997 on the least treacherous of five routes. Dreamtreks' Web site includes photos of tourists trekking the volcano's slope and dipping into the crater's turquoise-blue waters. An overnight tour costs US$70 per person, including food, bottled water, tents, sleeping bags, guides and transportation. From the starting point in the village of Santa Juliana, visitors take a bumpy ride in 4x4 jeeps across the dusty expanse of Crow Valley to a campsite, where the hike begins. As the country's tourism industry recovers, the Philippines are now seeing up to 1,000 visitors a month, especially during the hot months from March to May. "This place has a big potential but it hasn't been exposed much," says Danny Cerdena, a travel agency owner who includes the volcano among his company's destinations. Pinatubo, about 90 kilometres north of Manila, exploded in June, 1991, after a 500-year slumber. It dumped billions of tonnes of volcanic debris on three provinces, erasing entire farm communities and altering the world's climate. Pinatubo's eruptions were so massive that its top was blown away, reducing its height by 300 metres, forming a crater lake. During the rainy season, roughly from June to October, climbing is forbidden as the volcanic debris on its slopes fall down in deadly avalanches. Since Pinatubo is classed as one of the country's 22 active volcanoes, Mr. Benneth checks with the Philippine Institute of Volcanology and Seismology before every climb. Guy Hilbero, a tourism officer, was the first to climb Pinatubo, two years after the eruption. He led a few friends and outsiders on treks to the crater and this out-of-this-world place sculpted by fire, water and wind. He and others are hoping to have Pinatubo declared an ancestral domain of Aeta natives. That would protect it from land speculators who have arrived with the tourists. There also are incidents of opportunistic villagers preying on outsiders. In Santa Juliana, a sign outside a visitors' registry centre reads: "Please beware of fake gold bars! There is no such thing." The trail up the volcano from Santa Juliana rises so gently most of the way that the only indications of ascent are gushing brooks; some hot enough to boil eggs. On a recent climb, Hilbero and his entourage broke into yells when they first glimpsed the sky-blue crater lake behind the rim. When the euphoria subsided, some swam in the lake. Others dozed off their exhaustion during the two-hour stay in the crater. IF YOU GO: When to go The climbing seasons are January to May, shortly before the rainy season starts and October to December. What to wear Light, casual clothes are recommended for the trek due to hot, humid weather around Pinatubo. What to bring A wide-brimmed hat and sun-block lotion are musts. On the Web Dreamtreks is at http://www.dream treks.com. The Philippine Institute of Volcanology is at http://www.phivolcs.dost. gov.ph. 

*
May 10, 2001, p.A17
Bulge in Oregon may be volcanic: Four years' growth 
PORTLAND, Ore. - A large bulge in the Earth's crust has developed during the last four years near volcanoes in central Oregon but it is not clear whether it could mean a volcanic eruption any time soon, geologists said this week. The bulge -- 15 to 20 kilometres across and about 10 centimetres high -- was detected by satellite radar, said Willie Scott, a scientist at the United States Geological Survey's volcano lab in Vancouver, Wash. "Because it's a volcanic area and there's been a long history of volcanic activity in that part of the Cascades, it's possible it might be magma, or molten rock, moving deep underground," Scott said. The bulge is located near the Three Sisters, a trio of volcanoes at the centre of the Cascade Range in Oregon. The last big eruption in the Pacific Northwest occurred in May, 1980, when Mount St. Helens blasted off about 400 metres of its top. The uplift in Central Oregon is too broad and low to be noticed from the ground. The USGS scientists discovered the bulge through use of a relatively new technique called satellite radar interferometry, which uses satellite data to create images of the Earth's surface. Images taken at different times can be used to detect changes of even a few centimetres in the elevation of the ground. Scientists have looked across the West for signs of bulges but this is the first prominent change on record using this technique. "There's nothing as striking as this one," Scott said. "This is quite a prominent uplift. "But there's nothing right now that makes us think there's an imminent danger" of an eruption, he added. In addition to accelerating uplift, other indicators of an eruption would include earthquakes -- typically swarms of small quakes generated by rock fracturing as magma moves upward -- and large emissions of volcanic gases, such as carbon dioxide. The Cascades, which run from the California border into British Columbia, contain a number of volcanic peaks. Mount Hood, Oregon's highest mountain, is believed to have erupted just before the Lewis and Clark expedition reached the mouth of the Columbia River in 1805. About 7,000 years ago, Mount Mazama exploded south of Bend in an enormous explosion that left behind a caldera that now holds Crater Lake. 

*
May 17, 2001, p.A14
Italy: Woman on hike over active volcano declared missing
ROME - A Spanish woman who set out alone to hike over the Mount Etna volcano, part of which is in eruption, has been declared missing, authorities said yesterday. They said Beatriz Caldevilla Lebena, 41, had not been seen since shortly after she set out on Monday, equipped with food and camping gear, to explore the Sicilian volcano. 

*
July 19, 2001, p.A13 
Sicily: Mount Etna spews lava, rocks after days of tremors
ROME - Sicily's Mount Etna, Europe's most active volcano, erupted yesterday, forcing emergency services to build up defences against a lava flow moving 150 metres an hour. After days of tremors, lava spewed out of a fissure on an uninhabited slope 2,100 metres high. One man had hospital treatment after he was hit by a rock thrown out of the volcano. 

*
June 25, 2001, p.A12 
Philippines: 11,000 flee lava and rocks hurled from erupting volcano
LEGASPI - Massive eruptions shook the 2,467-metre Mayon volcano in the central Philippines yesterday, sending more than 11,000 people fleeing from superheated rocks shooting from its crater. With a sound like extended claps of thunder, huge mushroom-shaped grey clouds of rocks, lava and ash spurted from the crater. Further eruptions are expected. 

*
July 23, 2001, p.A10
Lava edges closer to Sicilian village. Residents near Mount Etna 'praying to God'.
NICOLOSI, Sicily - Residents of this Sicilian village perched on the slopes of Mount Etna came to church yesterday to pray for help as tongues of molten lava edged ever closer toward them. The seething magma from the mountain, Europe's highest and most active volcano, is within four kilometres of the first houses of the community of about 5,000. The lava has moved around two kilometres in the past four days, but has slowed in the last 48 hours and is heading for a shallow basin above Nicolosi, which may pool and slow its flow. "We're praying to God because, at this stage, He's the only one who can stop the lava," an elderly woman said as she made her way into the small Roman Catholic Church. Nicolosi, halfway up the southern slopes of the 3,350-metre mountain, has been swamped by lava before. Legend has it that in 1886 the local archbishop managed to divert the red-hot wave by holding up a statue of St. Anthony. Security forces shut down Catania Fontanarossa International Airport, in the shadow of Etna on the eastern edge of Sicily, to let firefighters sweep a layer of volcanic ash off the runway. Overnight, the mountain rumbled on, spitting fiery geysers for a fourth straight night, adding fresh flows to the thick rivers of angry magma. Five fissures have opened up in the mountain and are spitting out lava. Security forces used earth movers to make mud and dirt barricades to divert the flow and were ready to evacuate Nicolosi if necessary. Residents, most of whom cannot sleep at night because of the roaring of the volcano, are nervous, despite reassurances from civil officials there is no danger yet. A state of emergency was declared on Thursday, which allows the civil protection agency to call on the army for help if needed. A water-carrying plane made several swooping passes yesterday, dropping its load at the head of the lava stream to cool the bubbling crust. Witnesses said the mountain was spitting 50- to 100-metre fountains of fire-orange lava from several blast holes. Smoke and ash billowed 500 metres above the mountaintop. The lava flow, 400 metres across at its widest, has damaged several chairlifts dotted over the volcano, which is also a popular ski resort. Tourism representatives have said the magma is so hot it is unlikely any snow will settle this winter. The mountain, which has been active for centuries, rumbled into life again in mid-June and has been gushing smoke and ash for more than a week. On Wednesday, a new fissure cracked open at a height of 2,100 metres, sending fresh lava creeping down the volcano's southern slope. Hundreds of people have headed to Etna to watch the eruption, but officials have urged them to stay away. The last time Etna posed a threat was in 1992 when lava streams headed toward Zafferana, a town of 7,000 crouched on the mountain's lower slopes. The Italian military had to use controlled explosions to divert the flow. 

*
July 25, 2001, p.A10
Lava flow on Mount Etna 'shows signs of fatigue'. Village in volcano's path prays for safety.
NICOLOSI, Sicily - A village on Mount Etna that feared being engulfed in a river of lava had its prayers answered yesterday as the magma flow slowed. But civil protection officials said the situation on the mountain, which has been spewing lava for a week, could change quickly and the respite could be short-lived. "The situation is more positive and encouraging compared to yesterday," Franco Barberi, national head of the civil protection department, told a news conference. He said two fissures at high altitudes had closed and there was reduced activity on the southeast slopes of Etna, Europe's largest and most active volcano. During the night, a snaking river of lava remained steady at an altitude of about 1,065 metres. "The lava shows signs of fatigue. It is broadening out and becoming more dense," said Calogero Murgia, a civil protection official. The lava flow approaching the village of Nicolosi slowed as it pooled in a shallow basin about four kilometres above, seemingly in answer to prayers of the villagers, who had asked God to stop or divert the lava during a Sunday procession. Legend has it that in 1886 the village was spared from a threatening lava flow after the local archbishop brandished a statue of St. Anthony before it. A new fissure opened Monday on the eastern side of the volcano, acting as a natural safety valve that weakened the main lava flow downhill threatening Nicolosi. 

*
August 13, 2001
Ecuador: Volcanic ash rains on remote Andean town
QUITO - A persistent rain of ash from Tungurahua, 120 kilometres south of Quito, has fallen for a week, blackening the Andean landscape and affecting 20,000 people, volcano expert Patricia Mothes said yesterday. "People are living without electricity and many roofs are about to collapse under the weight of the ash." 

*
September 6, 2001, p.A1
Mount Pinatubo's crater to be drained: Engineers hope canal will avert natural disaster 
Jason Gutierrez 
ON PINATUBO VOLCANO, Philippines - Thick fog wrapped the crater of this infamous Philippine volcano yesterday as tribesmen completed excavation work on an engineering project aimed at preventing a natural disaster. Ninety Aeta tribesmen hurriedly erected sandbags on one end of a 70-metre canal as the temperature dropped and grey fog descended on the work site in late afternoon, reducing visibility to a few metres. Volcanologists plan to breach the crater wall and bleed 24 million cubic metres of water at 7 a.m. this morning, or about 11% of the volume that has accumulated in the past decade. They hope to reduce the possibility of the swollen crater lake bursting its walls and burying up to 44,000 people in watery volcanic debris in the town of Botolan to the west. "We are all excited that it will go well, but anxious that it won't go as planned," government volcanologist Mariton Bornas said as two rubber boats ferried the workers across the 2.5-kilometre- wide lake back to their base camp to the northeast. "We have no assurance that the entire crater wall will not collapse," added crew chief Nelson Pangilinan, an Aeta chieftain. Excavation work was completed by 90 tribesmen working around the clock in rotating eight-hour shifts from Aug. 26. Some members of the crew had been at the site for three weeks for preparatory work. They used only picks, shovels and wheelbarrows because there are no roads to the project site, situated 860 metres above sea level. Their base camp can only be approached on foot, after a three-hour hike across a moon-like grey wasteland of caked volcanic debris called Crow Valley. The five-metre wide canal spills into the Bucao-Maraunot river toward the South China Sea about 50 kilometres to the north-west, on the west coast of the island of Luzon. About 40,000 residents of Botolan began leaving the area yesterday to avoid a possible mud avalanche should the canal operation go awry. The crater lake started to fill soon after a huge eruption in 1991 and now holds about 210 million cubic metres of water. Foreign volcanologists have long warned of a potential catastrophe after an eruption because of the trapped water that was gradually eroding the crater wall. But it was only last month, as the water level rose close to the rim during the rainy season, that the government decided to act. Workers are paid the equivalent of $7.60 a day, good money for the Aetas. "We are confident that the Lord Mallari will safeguard us," Mr. Pangilinan said, referring to the Aetas' supreme deity. 

*
February 29, 2000, p.A14
Storm traps volcano gawkers
Jon Svanur Johannsson
REYKJAVIK, Iceland - Seven people reported missing after a volcano eruption, including four who helped rescue people stranded in their cars en route to see the spectacle, were found yesterday. Thousands of Reykjavik residents set off on Sunday to drive 120 kilometres east to witness the eruption of Mount Hekla, the country's most active volcano. Civil emergency services warned drivers not to go too near the volcano as it spewed lava from a seven-kilometre-long fissure into a deserted plain and emitted a column of ash up to six kilometres high. However, many curious onlookers ignored the advice and weather turned wintery. Up to 2,000 people were trapped in their cars by snow storms and had to wait up to 16 hours for rescue teams. Overnight, trucks helped ferry those trapped in their cars to the nearby town of Thorlakhofm or back to Reykjavik. Icelandic media said it was the most extensive rescue operation in the country since 5,000 people on the remote Vestmannaeyjar islands off the south coast had to abandon their homes in a volcanic eruption in January, 1973. Ragnar Stefansson, a geophysicist from the Icelandic Meteorological Office, said most people probably spent the night on the road in vain as the poor weather made it almost impossible to see the volcano. "On Sunday, the wind changed and started blowing to the east, directing the ash toward Europe. However, we have not received any news of the ash hitting Europe as by the time the wind changed, the power of the eruption had decreased considerably," the meteorologist added. "The force is at most no more than one-tenth of what it was in the beginning." Even though the eruption at Hekla, one of Europe's highest volcanoes at 1,491 metres, had calmed considerably yesterday, geologists said the activity could continue for about a month. That was the case when Hekla last erupted in 1991. There were major eruptions in 1510, 1693, 1766, 1845 and 1947. In the Middle Ages, the volcano was known as the "Gateway to Hell," and its rumblings were believed to be the screams of the tormented.

*
February 25, 2000, p.A14
30,000 flee volcano's deadly rivers of fire. Philippines' Mayon erupts. Burning rocks and ash darken sky over central province.
Enrique de Castro 
LEGAZPI, Philippines - One of the Philippines' deadliest volcanoes erupted yesterday, sending rivers of fire surging down its slopes, darkening towns with ash falls and forcing about 30,000 people to flee, officials said. The Mayon volcano in the central Philippines, which has been steadily building in activity since it reawakened last summer, unleashed 14 separate eruptions throughout the day. No casualties had yet been reported. The volcano, 330 kilometres southeast of Manila, hurled burning rocks and ash 10 kilometres into the sky. Some of the volcanic material fell back on to the mountain's slopes to gather in superheated torrents as hot as 900 C that roared downhill at about 80 km/h, volcanologists said. Joseph Estrada, the president, was to have flown to affected areas but cancelled the trip after the airport in the provincial capital of Legazpi was forced to close due to the airborne rocks and ash. The fiercest of the eruptions, occurring at mid-morning, threw up a mushroom cloud of ash that blotted out the sun, casting foothill towns into darkness, relief officials said. "I was cooking when the sky suddenly turned dark," said Luz Perela, who fled her home in Mayon's foothills after the fireworks began. "I could not see my surroundings. I just abandoned my cooking and ran outside with my children. It was so scary ... that's why we are here," Ms. Perela said while waiting for a government truck to take her to a refugee centre 10 kilometres from Mayon. As evening fell, rains began pelting the volcano and volcanologists warned of possible mudflows down Mayon's flanks if the rains intensified. "We have raised the alert to the maximum level of five, meaning a hazardous eruption is in progress," said Raymundo Punongbayan, chief of the Philippine Institute of Volcanology and Seismology. Waves of tremors shook Mayon as it began erupting early yesterday, unleashing rumbling sounds heard by residents as far away as Legazpi, 11 kilometres from the crater. "It's like a stampede of horses," a Legazpi resident said of the noises. Others compared the sounds to the booming of cannon. Relief agencies said a patient at a local hospital may have died of a heart attack amid the volcano's thunderous rumblings. Relief officials used military vehicles and dump trucks to ferry people from their villages to evacuation centres. Provincial officers said about 5,000 people living on Mayon's slopes had been evacuated before the eruption but by nightfall yesterday, refugee centres had swelled with more than 29,000 evacuees. Mayon has a history of violent eruptions, the worst occurring in 1814 when flaming ash killed some 1,200 people. It killed 77 villagers in its last major eruption in 1993. Located in rice-and coconut-growing Albay province, the 2,460-metre Mayon is one of 22 active volcanoes in the Philippines. While farmers hauled away their meagre possessions, tourists clicked cameras at the spectacular display. Ed de Leon, director of the Philippine Information Agency, said hotels in Legazpi had reported a 50% increase in room occupancy as tourists poured in to witness Mayon's awesome fury. On Wednesday night, spectators armed with cameras and video recorders gaped as glowing boulders rolled down the peak, breaking into small luminous pieces as they snaked down a deep gully on the volcano's southeastern slope. Like a gigantic cauldron, the crater glowed in a sea of darkness. "It was spectacular," Mr. de Leon said. 

*
February 29, 2000, p.A14
Evacuees scurry from Mayon's ire
Mynardo Macaraig 
LEGASPI, Philippines - The Mayon volcano roared with its strongest eruptions yesterday as hungry villagers swamped evacuation camps for free meals offered to tens of thousands of others genuinely displaced by the disaster. A plume of volcanic ash shot seven kilometres into the air as smouldering boulders flew skyward and lava gushed from the glowing crater in Albay province, 217 kilometres southeast of Manila, the capital. "This is stronger than Feb. 24," said volcanologist Ted Sandoval, referring to the volcano's initial blast last week. Other scientists warned a bigger blast could be on the way. "This is not yet the big one," said Ernesto Corpuz, chief of the eruption prediction division of the Philippine Institute of Vulcanology & Seismology. By Saturday night, nearly 48,000 people had taken shelter in schools, tents and other government buildings around the cone-shaped mountain, even though only 32,000 had been asked to move because of threats of lava flows, rocks and poisonous gases. Thousands of people, many wearing hoods and dust masks because of the sulphur-smelling yellow volcanic ash, fled their homes in villages outside the declared danger zone on foot and by trucks. Authorities said the number of evacuees could swell to 60,000 and overwhelm meagre food supplies. Experts appealed on radio for people not to flee because of ash falls, saying these could reach them in evacuation centres anyway. But mingling with genuine refugees from the eruptions are thousands seeking temporary relief from massive poverty, officials said. "We have received reports that some are just flocking to the evacuation centres to receive some relief goods," Alberto Romualdez, the health secretary, told radio station DZRH in Manila. "That is OK with us because these people are needy." Jose Salceda, a congressman who represents Albay in the House of Representatives, said the eruption has highlighted massive poverty in the area, which he blamed on a "systemic neglect" by the government. The Bicol region, which includes Albay, has the Philippines' highest unemployment rate, 45.1%, compared with a national average of 22.1%. It is also the second-poorest region, with 50.1% of residents living below the poverty threshold. Among the economic evacuees was a group of villagers from Busay, outside the danger zone, who crammed into a refrigerated van used to transport frozen chicken. "It's just too scary," said vendor Madel Lucila, 33, as she fled. Florentina Arenda, 52, a housewife and mother of three who fled Padang, also outside the declared danger zone, said mudflows threatened her home. "We are not going to risk our lives there," she said. The mountain, a top tourist draw in the region, started erupting on Thursday after months of increased volcanic tremors. There were no casualties in the volcano's 47th eruption since the 17th century. It was the first since 1993 when it killed 78 people who were tending farms on its lower slopes. 

*
March 22, 2000, p.A14
MANILA - Overweight police in the northern Philippines have been ordered to climb Mount Pinatubo volcano once a month as part of a physical fitness campaign. Roberto Calinisan, a police chief in Central Luzon, said yesterday the rotund officers will make the climb on April 4 and once a month thereafter until June, when the rainy season begins. He said more than 100 officers from Pampanga province, north of Manila, will join the exercise. Many Philippine police are overweight, prompting national Police Chief Panfilo Lacson to launch a physical fitness campaign in early March. He said those whose waists exceed 34 inches will be required to jog or do push-ups for six months, and could face dismissal if they don't slim down. The 2 1/2-hour trek to Pinatubo's summit, the location of a scenic lake, has become a popular activity for foreign and local tourists. Chief Calinisan said he would lead the men who have to make the trek. "This is not going to be a picnic," he said. "We will bring food but not sumptuous meals, because it will just defeat the purpose." Pinatubo, 88 kilometres north of Manila, exploded in June, 1991, in one of the 20th century's most violent volcanic eruptions. This dumped billions of tons of volcanic debris on three provinces, erasing entire communities from the map and destroying many farms. The eruptions were so massive that they blew off the top of the volcano, reducing its height by 300 metres to 1,450 metres. During the rainy season, the volcanic debris on its slopes and in river channels become deadly avalanches. 

*
April 3, 2000, p.A12
Volcano erupts prior to peak tourist season. 70% of Abuta's income derived from hot springs visitors.
Shino Yuasa
DATE, Japan - Put yourself in Kiyotaka Suzuki's shoes. The 40-year-old works in tourism promotion for the town of Abuta on Japan's northern island, Hokkaido. Tourists are big business in Abuta -- 70% of the town's income is from visitors to the hot springs by Lake Toya. "For months," says Mr. Suzuki, "our tourist division has been working on many interesting plans to attract tourists, including launching fireworks every night near Lake Toya from July 28 to Oct. 31." Then, on Friday, less than a month before the start of the peak holiday season, nearby Mount Usu erupted, pelting houses with small rocks, cracking their walls, blanketing huge areas in ash -- and inciting potential visitors to look elsewhere for their holidays. Mr. Suzuki accepts this fate. "We have long been living together with the Lake Toya and the volcano. In a way, we and the volcano share the same destiny. We will endure this hardship and make Abuta a more attractive town again." Yesterday, as a first step back toward normalcy, some of the region's 5,000 evacuees were allowed to return home, although for most it was just a brief visit. "It's nice to be back home. Although all we got to do was some laundry," said Hiroko Watanabe, a 43-year-old housewife. Ms. Watanabe was among dozens given a ride on the khaki-coloured trucks of the Self-Defence Forces for the first visit to their homes since last Wednesday, when authorities started evacuating people to gymnasiums and other relief centres. Seismic activity slowed in the area around the volcano yesterday, with 37 tremors monitored by 3 p.m. local time -- all but two of them imperceptible without seismic equipment, the country's Meteorological Agency said. More than 3,500 tremors have shaken the area in the previous three days. At one point, the volcano spread a pillar of smoke more than 2,000 metres (6,500 feet) into the sky. But experts said there was little likelihood that a major eruption would develop. "My judgment remains the same as yesterday. The eruptions are likely to be within a limited area," said Hiromu Okada, a professor at Hokkaido University and one of the leading scientists at the scene. The volcano, on the northern island of Hokkaido, first erupted on Friday, followed by a second eruption in the early hours of Saturday. Officials said Abuta's roads were covered in 20 centimetres of ash by Saturday. But Mount Usu has shown little sign of developing into the most feared scenario -- the volcano blowing its top and spraying lava, hot gas and stones into the towns below. Fujio Watanabe, 76, speaking by telephone, praised the authorities' efficiency since he moved into a shelter on Wednesday with his 66-year-old wife Chiyoko. "Abuta town has given us a mask and a package of daily necessity goods such as a bottle of water, clothes, towels and soap. I am very impressed by the government's swift work," said Mr. Watanabe.

*
April 10, 2000, National Edition, p.A13
Japan: Lull allows short trip home
DATE - Guarded by six military helicopters, 101 residents of Sobetsu, a town near erupting Mount Usu, went home for 35 minutes yesterday, accompanied by 700 fire department, military and police officers. Since returning to life on March 31, the 732-metre-high volcano has spewed out ash and rocks, although activity has reduced recently. Volcano experts say any lull is short-term and warn that a full-scale eruption is possible. 

*
April 28, 2000, p.E13
Driving Kilauea's lava highway. Crater Rim Drive gives motorists a circle tour of the birthplace of the Big Island of Hawaii. Hawaiian hot spot.
Ted Davis
It's a safe bet that none of us will ever drive on any surface other than that of planet Earth, but a very good extraterrestrial substitute can be had by traversing by road the eerie landscape of one of the world's most continuously active volcanoes. The Crater Rim Drive and Chain of Craters Road wind their way through a sea of jagged black lava that has been deposited by the Kilauea Volcano in the shadow of towering Mauna Loa, on the Big Island of Hawaii. The relative geothermal silence at the actual cone of Kilauea has allowed the construction of a visitors centre that is well stocked with maps of hiking trails in the area, as well as the roads themselves. But the steaming, sulphurous vents of the Kilauea caldera and spectacular ongoing eruptions of the lava through rifts at the water's edge leave no doubt that Kilauea is very much alive, and is still in the midst of forming the island. The Big Island is officially named Hawaii, but this simple, English language moniker is used to avoid confusion with the title of the state, which actually comprises six main islands. And it is indeed big, easily dwarfing the other five, with a land mass more than twice the size of Kauai, Maui, Lanai, Molokai and the popular Oahu combined. The southern-most island in the Hawaiian chain, the Big Island is also the most youthful, in geological terms. While the other islands are known for their lush vegetation and white sand beaches, the Big Island is distinguished by black lava beaches and vast ranch lands in its northeastern reaches, as well as more typical South Pacific flora. Two snow-capped volcanoes -- Mauna Loa and Mauna Kea -- formed the island, and dominate the view from most points. They rise to more than 3,960 metres, while Kilauea reaches about 1,220 metres. But for a ringside seat to volcanic action, Kilauea is the place to be. From the town of Hilo, on the Big Island's northeastern coast, Kilauea is about 48 kilometres southwest in a gradual climb on Route 11 to the gateway of Volcanoes National Park. After paying a fee of $5 (US) per car, you enter the park and make a quick right turn on to Crater Rim Drive, which takes you to the visitors centre. Check out the volcano displays and watch the short film on eruptions before setting out to circle the Kilauea Caldera on the 12-kilometre Crater Rim Drive loop road. Observation areas provide an opportunity to watch the steaming craters within the caldera, and short hikes have been organized to the lava fields. After making the loop, a right turn starts the 32-kilometre Chain of Craters Road toward the sea, and en route passes through the moon-like lava fields caused by volcanic rifts dating from 1969 to 1974. The jagged black fields stretch to the horizon in all directions. Hikers are advised to prepare for "a long, hot hike over uneven terrain." When the road reaches the Pacific coast, it bends left and runs parallel to the water's edge near some spectacular headlands, until reaching an abrupt end where more recent lava flow engulfed the pavement. Here, lines of cars crowd both sides of the road leading back from the dead end, and people walk up a small lava rock rise to get a glimpse of the most active and photographed rift, located about three kilometres away. A telescope is the best way to see the fire show at this distance, and most people time their arrival for the early evening, when the colourful explosions are best seen. For a better view, hiking shoes, long pants and water will be necessary, as the walk through the lava shield and back is about a four-hour trek. Bring a long lens for your camera, and heed the park warnings that "frequent explosions" near the rift "can rip open the ground and throw rocks in all directions." The much older Mauna Loa and Mauna Kea volcanoes that form-ed the Big Island aren't very accessible by vehicle, although there is an east-west saddle road that straddles the highlands between the two mountains. If your rental car or SUV is approved for the job, then drive on the saddle road to see both mountains up close. Mauna Kea has nine astronomical observatories at its summit, owing to the extremely clear, calm weather up there. Intrepid vacationers can drive to the information station at the Onizuka Center for International Astronomy after calling 808-961-2180 to check for any weather restrictions. The town of Hilo is the most convenient centre from which to explore the northeast side of the island, and has a lot of local history to fill a day. It thrived as a whaling port in the 1800s, and was battered by tsunami waves in 1946 and 1960. The park on Hilo's waterfront is the site of commercial buildings and homes destroyed by the waves. 

*
December 21, 2000, National Edition, p.A15
Popo lets off some steam: Many volcanoes aren't too predictable. 'They're like people,' says one scientist. 'They'll have a fit of temper and you don't really expect it.' But Popocatepetl is different.
Patchen Barss 
On Monday, the second highest mountain in Mexico cut way back on its smoking. Popocatepetl, an active volcano about 60 kilometres east of Mexico City, cut down from about 200 giant puffs of steam and ash per day to just 10. This was not a good sign. "Volcanoes aren't too predictable," said Mark Stasiuk, a volcanologist at the Canadian Geologic Survey. "They're like people: They'll have a fit of anger and you don't really expect it." Popocatepetl's outbursts, though, are easier to predict than many volcanoes', as geologists have been monitoring its behaviour for decades. They know that, as with many people, the reduction in smoking meant an explosion was imminent. To understand why Popocatepetl on Tuesday started hurling 1.5-metre chunks of molten rock half a kilometre in the air and red hot cinders two km high, it's informative to examine why the mountain started smoking in the first place. The volcano's smoking problem (really a steaming problem) has deep origins, starting about 50 km below the surface, where the suboceanic Cocos Plate is sliding under the North American continental plate, a process known as subduction. As the Cocos Plate subducts, it takes a bit of the Pacific Ocean with it. "As it goes down, it releases that water to the rock above it," said Stasiuk. "Water has a strong tendency to reduce the melting temperature of rock." This molten rock, or magma, is less dense than the surrounding material, so it becomes buoyant and tends to rise through fissures in the crust. It works its way up to a depth of 10 or 15 km, where its density matches that of the surrounding solid rock. When it has found equilibrium, the magma starts to cool. "Once the stuff gets into a magma chamber it solidifies slowly," said Stasiuk. "While solidifying, certain crystals form dense crystals that allow the remaining material to get lighter and more buoyant. The early crystals tend to be devoid of any water. As they form, they concentrate water in the remaining molten rock. The water starts to form steam bubbles that make a bit of a froth. If the pressure gets high enough, it causes cracks in the magma chamber." Depending on the weaknesses in the rock, magma can shoot in any direction. If it goes sideways, it can cause minor earthquakes. If it moves upwards, though, it sets off eruption warning signals. "These things don't start instantaneously. The stuff has to crack the rocks, then make its way up that crack -- we're talking 10 km and it doesn't ooze very quickly," said Stasiuk. "In the weeks or months beforehand, you get lots of warnings. When a rock cracks you get little earthquakes. And because there's stuff pushing its way up, the ground tends to swell. You can monitor these things and see the stuff is getting closer to the surface." As the magma gets closer to the surface, it heats the rainwater that saturates the top few metres of the crust, causing the plumes of steam and ash that foretell an eruption. Many volcanoes have individualized patterns for how they react to such pressure. Popocatepetl initially finds release by puffing away, but eventually starts to hold everything in. Then, thousand-degree lava bursts through the surface, creating spectacular images for well-prepared observers. But, impressive though such an eruption is, Popocatepetl's current violence is small potatoes, geologically speaking. On the Volcanic Explosivity Index, a rough system akin to the Richter Scale used for measuring earthquake intensity, the eruption rates a 2 (explosive) on a scale from 0 (non-explosive) to 8 (mega-colossal). "Popo has had some quite large eruptions but they're few and far between," said Stasiuk. That's because Popocatepetl is one mountain that usually knows how to let off steam before the pressure gets too great. 

*
February 10, 1999, p.A17
Sounding out a volcanic disaster. The collapse of volcanic islands off the west coast of Africa will inevitably cause giant tidal waves, one of which could threaten Florida thousands of years in the future -- or much sooner.
Aisling Irwin
The night the Atlantic island of Fogo erupted, its flank split open as though cut by a knife. Fire roared from a line of fissures as lava bombs the size of small buses were catapulted 455 metres away. By morning a cloud of ash stretched five kilometres into the sky. Nearly four years later, just a gentle wisp of smoke rises from the vent and villagers have returned to live in the crater. But Fogo -- one of the Cape Verde islands, 800 kilometres west of the African country of Senegal -- still fascinates British geologists. They believe that monumental changes are going on deep inside the island that may help them to understand an impending catastrophe at another volcano -- La Palma, in the Canary Islands, 992 kilometres to the northeast. If they are right, they are the first to witness, and understand, a unique moment in the evolution of a volcano. Fogo appeared a few hundred thousand years ago when it erupted from the ocean floor. Today, it reaches a daunting 2,700 metres and is growing ever bigger and steeper. Its eastern flank has collapsed once already, thundering cataclysmically into the ocean 40,000 years ago and leaving a giant landslide scar of a perfection that delights a volcanologist: It is 8-10 kilometres across, and at least 1.5-3 kilometres deep. Fogo's future is inevitable: It will become so unstable that the eastern flank will collapse again in a drama with global consequences. But how this will happen has not, until now, been understood. If it collapses quickly, its impact on the ocean will cause a tsunami, or large destructive wave, that could travel several thousand kilometres, hitting the Canaries and devastating the coasts of Portugal, Spain, and north and west Africa. There is little need to worry, however, say Simon Day and Bill McGuire of the Benfield Greig Hazard Research Centre at University College, London. The disaster will not occur for many thousands of years. But the same cannot be said of La Palma, which is further along in the same process and, like Fogo, is one of the steepest volcanic islands in the world. La Palma may take thousands of years to hit the sea -- but there is a small chance it may go very soon. Because it faces west, the resulting tsunami could lash Florida with waves tens of metres high. ``These are the two volcanoes we are most worried about,'' says Prof. McGuire. ``It's not that La Palma is going to collapse sometime -- it has already started.'' The latest stage of the collapse began during an eruption in 1949, when a vast chunk of land on the western side began to slide toward the ocean. For some reason the rock shuddered to a halt after a trip of only four metres. There it waits today, ready for another trigger. It is vital to understand the geology behind such collapses, and scientists have been gathering evidence of past devastation in the Canaries in order to do so. They believe that an oceanic volcano is cyclical, crumbling into the sea every hundred thousand years or so. Doug Masson, a marine geologist at Britain's Southampton Oceanography Centre, visited the islands with Tony Watts, a professor at Oxford University, in a ship equipped with a multibeam echosounder, a device that projects 80 sound waves in a fan shape towards the ocean floor. On La Palma's western side, the reflections disclosed an ancient landslide that stretched for 80 kilometres and had ruffled the ocean floor as far as 590 kilometres away. Supporting the story of an ancient collapse, Dr. Day and some Spanish colleagues have discovered tsunami deposits in the Canaries that are the unmistakable detritus of waves that once surged 100 metres up the islands' flanks. On La Palma, the geologists are monitoring minute changes in the shape of the volcano, which they hope will reveal the imperceptible swelling before an eruption that could trigger the collapse. Measurements taken since 1994 show that the western part of the island may still be sliding slowly seawards at around eight millimetres a year. On both Fogo and La Palma, Dr. Day is doing research of a more fundamental nature. He is trying to understand how the instability occurs in the first place, by studying Fogo's collapse scar and tentative 1970s evidence of a sub-sea avalanche stretching up to 3,600 metres from the island. Virtually all volcanic oceanic islands have the same structure: a central magma chamber from which three rift zones emanate. It is a stable set-up, as the zones are held in place by the pressure exerted by the magma in each swarm of vertical fractures, or dykes. Above the dykes lie tell-tale eruptive fissures; it is these that Dr. Day has been mapping on Fogo. He has noticed something odd: Over time, their orientation seems to have changed. Dr. Day believes that he is close to showing that the reorientation was the first episode of Fogo's preparation for its ancient collapse. The strange drama unfolded as follows: Something made the volcano a little unstable, which forced the magma to start flooding into a new north-south set of fractures parallel to the coast. Eventually, it abandoned the earlier rift zones to form a realigned one. Quickly, a positive feedback built up as the magma, now exerting its pressure in a single direction because of the rift-zone realignment, caused the ground to the east to become unstable. Collapse became inevitable. The same process is going to happen again, believes Dr. Day. He is studying the newer fractures on Fogo and thinks that the same pattern of reorientation is beginning again. Over the past few centuries, the magma has abandoned the two rift zones that stretch from the centre to the southwest and to the northwest. A new rift zone has developed, parallel to the coastline and through the zone of the ancient collapse. Every new eruption in this rift zone -- there are several each century -- is forcing the eastern flank of the volcano a little closer to the sea. Over on La Palma, there is evidence of a similar pattern of rift-zone reorganization -- but it is 6,000 years ahead. No one knows what triggers these changes, but the most likely candidate is a change in the sea level. Collapses tend to occur during, or soon after, periods of rapid sea-level rise, especially at the end of glaciations. The rise, coupled with the switch to a more humid climate, causes the water table to ascend within a volcano. Perhaps the water pressure increases, forcing the rocks apart and weakening the volcano's structure. The scientists are itching to do more work on Fogo to glean more knowledge of this moment in a volcano's evolution. They want to take advantage of an innovation in the Global Positioning System to monitor tiny movements on the island at a tenth of the usual cost. Dr. Day and others are putting together a proposal to sail around the Cape Verde Islands to make an acoustic map of the ocean floor. They want to update the 1970s seismic survey, to see just how powerful that old landslide was. The sea floor there is unusually rugged. If they can discover the extent to which the landslide surged up the submarine mountains, they will be able to estimate the landslide's speed, from which they will be able to calculate the size of the resulting tsunami and predict how large the next one will be. 

*
March 13, 1999, p.23
Extreme Hiking: For the adventurous (with thick leather shoes): A stroll on an active volcano
Michael H. Sedge
Travelling throughout the night, I arrived in Catania, on the east coast of Sicily, two hours before sunrise. It had been an unplanned, spur-of-the-moment trip, triggered by the sudden eruption of Mount Etna the previous day. Now, in the distance, I could see a glowing red, snake-like trail running down the 3,352-metre mountain slope. In a matter of hours I would stand along the edge of that river of lava, feeling the heat rise from the molten rock, and the steam seeping up from beneath my feet. Since the beginning of human existence, humans have been intrigued by the fire-belching geological phenomena known as volcanoes. They are spectacular displays of the Earth's energy and temperament. It has only been during the past century, however, that our knowledge of volcanoes has grown to a point where adventurers feel comfortable enough to explore the flaming slopes of such monsters as Mount Etna. Because of the excitement and obvious danger involved, volcano exploring has become a favoured pastime among thrill-seeking athletes and adventurers. Inasmuch as volcanoes have always inspired awe and wonder, they are one of nature's simpler phenomena. The Earth's centre is nothing more than a molten hotbed, and from this core, magma flows directly to the Earth's surface through channels, such as those making up the volcanoes of Hawaii, which are constantly active. In other cases, magma is stored in chambers that expand below the Earth's surface like balloons, and eventually erupt. The latter was the case of Mount St. Helens, which erupted on May 18, 1980, in a wooded area of Washington state, creating a rapid and sudden flowing of rock and other materials known as a ``debris avalanche.'' Italy's Mount Vesuvius, which erupted in AD 79, covering the ancient cities of Pompeii and Herculanium, is another example of a sudden volcanic eruption. In this case, however, a turbulent mixture of gas and rock fragments was violently ejected from the crater, creating a high-temperature ash flow that rapidly moved down the slopes, devouring everything in its path. Volcanoes, for the most part, are found along the tensional cracks of the Earth's surface -- the ocean ridges and their continental links. The plate that forms the Pacific Rim is the reason for the so-called ``Ring of Fire.'' In fact, there are more than 10,000 volcanoes in the Pacific alone that extend 1,000 metres or more. Most of these, however, are located below the surface of the ocean. The reason for this multitude of submerged volcanoes is that the ocean floor is thin, making it easier for the underlying magma to pierce. Most European volcanoes are the ``vent'' type, with the expanding gases forming the surrounding earth into a cone shape as they are forced outward. With these ones it's common to see smoke but no magma, since the molten lava cools prior to reaching the surface. Belching white-hot lava as it hissed and bellowed, it was obvious that nothing had cooled below the surface of Etna. From the village of Nicolosi, we'd driven to the Sapienza Refuge, on the mountain's southern slopes. A cable car ran up Etna until 1985; that year, lava flow destroyed part of the cableway, making it inoperative. Today, most adventurers begin their ascent from here, either by foot, which takes a few hours, or by four-wheel-drive vehicles for a 45-minute uphill ride. Guides also gather here to accompany visitors to the summit craters, which are often flowing with hot magma while. From the opposite side of the mountain, lava is spewed skyward with lion-like roars. There have been more than 160 recorded eruptions from Mount Etna, resulting in a volcanic mountain with a base circumference of 201 kilometres. The mountain today is constantly bubbling in one or more of its many craters; it is as close to a vision of hell as any mortal is likely to get. Because of this, Etna is rated highly on adventurers' lists, although it commands respect: It can be threatening, and even dangerous under certain conditions. Despite the ever-present 704C lava flows, Etna, like most of the world's volcanoes, is a seasonal adventure. Most explorers make the trip between May and October, when the all-terrain tour vehicles operate; during the rest of the year, the summit is often buried in snow. Since the slopes of most volcanoes are not patrolled, safety, conditioning, and proper gear are essential in volcano exploring. Even at the height of summer, the higher levels of most volcanoes can be very cold. Etna, for example, often has winds of up to 185 kilometres an hour and more that add to the chill factor. In other months, temperatures can be extremely bitter. The higher altitudes, more often than not, are shrouded in clouds, and visibility can be poor. Volcano exploring is really no more dangerous than mountain climbing, but when the ground thunders beneath your feet and a lump of hot rock shoots a half-kilometre into the sky, you'll feel a thrill -- if you want to call it that -- which no other adventure can provide. GEARING UP FOR VOLCANIC ADVENTURES Like any sport, volcano exploring requires some special gear. Boots are number one on the list. There are a number of good brands, but the key factor is to have thick leather soles. Many people have made the mistake of using boots with rubber or plastic soles on the slopes of Etna. This frequently results in hot feet and, in some cases, melted soles. Heavy socks, long pants, long underwear, coat, hat, gloves, and sunglasses should be seriously considered, particularly for excursions up European volcanoes. Weather at the mountain base is sunny and mild, but once you get into higher altitudes you will be glad to have the extra clothing. A walking stick is useful when it comes to stepping along hazardous areas. A light aluminum stick is best. A full canteen of water is another must, even for short excursions. You will not find any water holes on volcanoes. Because of the natural beauty that volcanic environments provide, a camera is often a good idea. Some of the most dramatic images ever captured on film have come from sudden lava bursts. Though you may never need to use it, a first aid kit should be taken for all outings. Most of these items will easily fit into a backpack. If you decide to camp on a volcano -- which is frequently done, though sites must be selected with great care -- you will also want to include the usual camping equipment. One very important thing is a medical mask, which can be purchased inexpensively at medical supply stores. These come in handy if you are exploring an active volcano that has sulfur fumes seeping from its crevasses. 

<#GM>
*
Wednesday, January 1, 1997
GLOBE TROTTER New Zealand Volcano a magnet 
One year after it started its latest round of eruptions by vapourizing a crater lake, New Zealand's towering Mount Ruapehu has become a magnet for international tourists. At 2,976 metres, Ruapehu is the tallest of three volcanoes in the North Island's Tongariro National Park, a five-hour drive south of Auckland. For travel information, write the New Zealand Tourism Board, Suite 1200, 888 Dunsmuir St., Vancouver, V6C 3K4, or phone (604) 684-2117. 

*
March 7 2001 
Title: Red flames in a velvet sky: on the Italian island of Stromboli, an evening climb leads to a stunning view of Europe's only continuously erupting volcano. 
Author: Heather Hill 
The sun is not yet up when the overnight ferry from Naples bears in on the island of Stromboli. In the dark-blue velvet of the Mediterranean night, you can stand on the side of the ship and watch the scattering of lights from the town slowly approach. The outline of the towering volcano for which Stromboli is renowned is barely visible, but its cone, more than 900 metres above the town, is smoldering like the tip of a giant cigar. Suddenly, the decks of the Luna Rossa are filled with gasps and cries of amazement: the volcano has just exploded, expelling violent red flames skyward with a fury that has to be seen to be believed. "Incredibile!" confirms one of the Italian passengers. The cone soon disappears from view as the ferry angles toward the pier, but the excitement lingers. Stromboli has more than lived up to its reputation. As Europe's only continuously active volcano and one of only five such in the world, it has performed right on cue. Stromboli is probably the best known of Italy's seven Aeolian Islands, which are the highest points of a submerged chain of volcanic mountains. Not just for the volcano but for the stream of authentic celebrities alighting to sample the black-sand beaches and ink-blue sea, the unparalleled views, the unique architecture of the bone-white houses and the narrow, flower-filled streets of the town. From Aristotle Onassis and the king of Belgium in the island's early years of tourism to Umberto Eco, Isabella Rossellini and fashion kings Dolce and Gabbana today, Stromboli's guest list certifies its cachet in an era of mass tourism. Exclusive or prohibitively expensive the island is not, however. Aboard the Luna Rossa are hard-core backpackers who will head for low-priced pensione, or simply camp out on the beach, dining on pizza ($3.50 a slice). Even those with the means to stay in one of the three-star hotels find the accommodation relatively spartan. Everything -- from drinking water to vegetables and furniture -- has to be brought to Stromboli by boat. Even the restaurant seafood is imported, despite a sea teeming with fish. That's because the only industry here is tourism. This chapter in the island's intermittent occupation (dating back 3,000 years ago) began when Ingrid Bergman and Roberto Rossellini (Isabella's parents) landed on Stromboli in 1949 to make a movie of the same name. Their very public and adulterous affair (conducted in a small red house on Via Vittorio Emmanuelle III, identifiable by a bronze plaque commemorating the event) triggered worldwide headlines. With the advent of tourism, the native-born farmers, fishermen and traders (who caught rainwater on the roofs of their houses to survive) gradually gave way to hotel employees, shop owners and vendors, many from Sicily, the Italian province to which the islands belong. "Giro?" inquire bored, macho young men sprawling at small umbrella-shaded tables from where they sell boat tours around the island. The giro is a must. In the course of 2-1/2 hours, I saw Ginostra, a hardscrabble cliff-top hamlet (pop. 20) that boasts the world's smallest harbour (big enough for exactly one boat). With a donkey as the sole mode of transportation, Ginostra is a haven for those seeking utter tranquillity. Next, I saw a colossal black slide of hardened lava called "La Sciara del Fuoco -- literally, the "ski run of fire." This is the route that the magma takes as it tumbles down the west side of the mountain to the sea. La Sciara is overwhelmingly cinematic, seemingly created for the opening scene of a James Bond movie. At the base of La Sciara are waters that are a scuba divers' paradise, with dramatic rock formations and abundant marine life. But even at three metres, where we were allowed off the boat for a swim, it is heaven. The sea, gently heated by the black rock, is of a colour the Italians call blu assoluta. By a trick of light, however, the water around Strombolicchio, our next stop, is a stunningly pure azure. "Little Stromboli" (pop. 0), a 60-metre-high outcropping of solidified lava about two kilometres off the east coast, is home only to a lighthouse, but it is a magnet for divers, snorkellers, cabin cruisers and tour boats like ours. The boat returned us to the town of Stromboli (pop. 400) just in time for lunch. Italy is legendary for its indulgent beach culture, and Stromboli is one of the purest expressions of the form. Many of the people on the beach are nude or semi-nude and their chief pursuit is a tan. But the island, whose name derives from the ancient Greek word meaning "round," is a true wilderness paradise, a joy to explore on foot, by bicycle, in a kayak, or a boat. (There are no cars here, just scooters and a few golf cart-style commercial vehicles.) And, of course, there is the volcano, which I, like countless others, had come determined to climb. So it was that on a Friday evening at 5 p.m. I joined about 50 trekkers in Piazza San Vincenzo, the main square and departure point for the official tours. (Many people climb on their own, unwilling to pay the $40 fee and to move at a pace set by the guide.) I was issued with a white hard hat and gauze mouth protector and assigned to group number one. Several moments later, to my surprise, I heard someone asking Signora Eel to identify herself. Unthinkingly, I owned up to my name, and was told to join the second group. I had an immediate intimation of trouble even though the guide, a genial man named Mario, assured me his group, "the blue helmets," would be leaving just five minutes after the first. But Mario was slow right from the start. He was chatty, too, halting frequently to regale us with local lore. We stopped to rest, to have a snack, to receive instructions on the next leg of the journey. I looked up the mountain in dismay. Group number one was out of sight. "Andiamo!" I begged Mario. "Avanti!" He just shook his head, amused by the straniera's impatience. Hadn't he been doing this for 25 years? When we were just below the summit, a tantalizing 20 minutes away, Mario reined us in yet again. We had to sit down and wait, he announced. The clouds were wrong, he explained. The weather was not good. Conditions were not right. By now it was dark and cold and I had had enough. I was trapped in a Seinfeld episode, playing Elaine. I argued furiously with Mario in my fractured Italian. Why were we huddled down in steerage when everyone else was on the top deck enjoying the view? The one eruption we had seen so far was so fantastic that it was senseless to sit here in the dirt while the party was in full swing up above. Mario went off to the Italians in the group and complained to them about me, but the mutiny was starting to spread. He conferred softly on a two-way radio with fellow guide Antonio. The eagle must have landed, somewhere, because suddenly Mario had us on our feet, putting on the hard hats, getting out the gauze masks, priming our flashlights. We were up and climbing. The pizzo is a slender ridge about 100 metres above the cone from where you have an excellent view of the volcanic activity. The eruptions come every 10 to 20 minutes, so spectators usually stay up top for an hour to make the journey worthwhile. The blue helmets managed to see one more explosion from the volcano before dense clouds rolled in, bringing an overpowering stink of sulphur. Coughing broke out up and down the ridge. The masks were useless. The cone was invisible. We didn't need Mario to tell us the show was over. One more minute up there would have been unbearable. As we trudged back down in silent exhaustion, over hectares of loose sand that found a permanent home in my shoes, and then through endless stands of wild bamboo, I calculated: seven hours with Mario, two bursts from the volcano. No wonder women are so mad at men. However, what we did see was magnificent. Shooting cinders, moving walls of fire. They brought to life the classical myth of the god Vulcan, a lame but divine smith who works at his forge in the depths of the volcano, hammering out weapons for the god of war. The islands were also believed to be the home of the god of the winds, Aeolus, who refused to give Odysseus the favourable breeze to take him back to Ithaca, a decision that gave the wily Trojan warrior the longest Mediterranean cruise in history. Traces of this ancient world are housed in a splendid archeological museum on the Aeolian island of Lipari. A 90-minute ferry ride away, through pale purple lava islets, Lipari is everything Stromboli is not: urban, developed, heavily touristed. But the museum is a marvellous portal to the prehistoric past. One archeological excavation yielded salt and pepper shakers, teapots and colanders, all made of stone -- prototypes, you might say, of modern-day Italian design. The Aeolian Islands were declared a World Heritage Site by UNESCO in December and will now be protected from the worst depredations of developers. Up to now, on Stromboli, development has been checked by the unpredictability of the volcano, whose cataclysmic eruption in 1930 killed six people and drove away nearly all of the island's 8,000 residents. The steep slope and the constant lava flow have made it impossible to build a road all the way around the island. Indeed, Stromboli, the most remote of the Aeolian Islands, is so basic that public electricity did not arrive until 1976. Vito Russo, proprietor of La Sirinetta, Stromboli's first hotel, says the community has applied its own breaks, giving almost full compliance to a ban on new building. Buyers can build on or renovate existing residential properties only. Unusual for Italy, where illegal building proliferates, only three houses have been built in defiance of the regulations. When Dolce and Gabbana decided to buy a home on Stromboli (Giorgio Armani already being installed on another volcanic island called Pantelleria), they spent a small fortune remodelling two adjacent houses. "The people here want to protect the island," explains Russo. "They have no problem with not being able to build. They see the value in the nature. Yes, we are isolated, but that isolation is what has saved us.

*
April 28 1997, p C1. 
Title: Television: trip to `live' volcano makes for hot documentary. 
Author: John Haslett Cuff
THE very telegenic and well-informed host of Journeys With Lauren Millar (Discovery, tonight at 9 p.m.) described the plight of her documentary film crew during filming of tonight's episode, Volcano, this way: "Just a few days before, an American geologist painted a doomsday scenario for us: 'If that mountain really blows, we're only about four kilometres away. We wouldn't have a prayer. First we would burn from the inside out because the air would be like a charcoal fire. Then we'd be consumed by hot, black ash.' Little did we know this ash fall was just a taste of what would come." The volcano in question is located in the West Indies amidst Montserrat's Soufriere Hills, and in August of 1995 it blew for the first time in 300 years. Hurling ash and smoke more than a mile into the sky, the volcano deluged the island's capital and forced more than 3,000 people to flee. There were subsequent eruptions and earth tremors, and all evidence pointed to a potential disaster on the scale of Mount St. Helen's in 1980 in which 57 people perished. The documentary begins as the "lava dome" of the volcano is building dramatically, suggesting two possible outcomes. In the best case, the dome would eventually settle and seal the volcano, preventing any further eruptions in the immediate, foreseeable future. Or it could just as easily blow up and create further havoc in the entire region of the West Indian islands. Millar, who produces (with partner Craig Moffit), writes, directs and hosts the series, went with her crew to Montserrat to hang out with the geologists and volcanologists who were monitoring and studying the "live" volcano which seemed so ready to explode and rain devastation on the small, idyllic island. Disaster is the best possible subject for television and can quickly raise an informative documentary into the realm of the exceptional. Millar and the Journeys team stayed close to the volcano specialists, following them around for days. In the process of filming, they shared in some of the risk and all of the excitement of discovery as the volcanologists "read" the entrails of the explosive mountain. Scaling the mountain on foot, hanging around close enough to risk being buried in boiling lava, drowned in ashes or crushed by rocks, the filmmakers tried gamely to convey a sense of the "adventure" of science, which is the whole point of the series. The cameras capture some impressive eruptions of smoke and ash, and Millar flies in a helicopter with the team of scientists as they touch down on an ash-covered beach which reaches temperatures of 400 C when the lava scorches the verdant landscape and literally evaporates the waves as they wash in to shore. This may seem like pretty tame stuff compared to the million-dollar special effects of such Hollywood disaster films as Dante's Inferno, but the danger is very real. Throughout, Millar remains pristine in her white tank tops and extremely calm and collected as she interviews the scientists who explain the portents of "pyroclastic flow," ultraviolet light and sulphur dioxide emissions with just enough controlled enthusiasm to impart a sense of drama and danger (after all, this is prime-time TV). Next week the show explores the plight of porpoises, and future shows will look into forensic science, emergency medicine and sharks. Journeys With Lauren Millar was originally produced by TVO and is now in its fourth season, but this is its first run as an independent production of Millar and Moffit's Indigo Moon Pictures Inc. While we're on the subject, disasters and professional risk-takers seem to be something of a theme for the Discovery Channel as it begins another new season. On Wednesday (at 10 p.m.), a new series called (what else?) Disasters has its debut. The first show is called Riders of the Storm and it explores the phenomena associated with tornadoes and lightning. And tomorrow night (also at 10), The Professionals profiles people who take considerable risks to earn a day's wages. Fine Tuning Talk shows Studio 2. Sports panel will discuss Cito Gaston; NHL playoffs (TVO at 8 p.m.) Face Off and Pamela Wallin have been pre-empted for election-call specials. (\f6 Newsworld at 8:30 and 9 p.m.) rDavid Letterman. Kurt Russell, Sinbad, Paula Cole. (CBS at 11:35 p.m.) Jay Leno. Norm MacDonald, Deborah Farentino. (NBC at 11:35 p.m.)\f6 rBill Maher. Rebecca De Mornay, Wayne Dwyer, Emme, Joe Montegna. (BBS, ABC at 12:05 a.m.) Dates and times may vary across the country. Please check local listings. 

*
May 31 2000, p 1. 
Title: Volcano draws thousands of visitors yearly. 
Author: Ken Becker 
"For many people, the 1980 eruption is a historic event," says Peter Frenzen, staff scientist at Mount St. Helens National Volcanic Monument in southern Washington state, which attracts more than one million visitors a year. "But many of the people who come here now weren't even born then. To them, you might as well be talking about Abe Lincoln." At 8:32 a.m. PDT on Sunday, May 18, 1980, awakened by a powerful earthquake, Mount St. Helens erupted, propelling an avalanche of ice and boulders more than 20 kilometres. Moments later, a second blast uncorked whirlwinds of debris that downed some 400 square kilometres of old-growth forest and sent a mushroom cloud of ash nearly 25 kilometres into the sky. It blocked out the sun, caught a northeast wind, and rained inky ash throughout the northwestern United States. Red-hot lava flows poured from the crater. By the time it stopped, the mountainside was transformed into a moonscape. Fifty-seven people -- and uncounted animals and plants -- were killed. Over the years, survivors returned and began rebuilding. Plants poked through the blackened crust. Mammals such as elk, black bears and mountain goats found a new, or old, home. Now, perhaps attracted by the notoriety of the catastrophe, visitors from across North America and around the world travel to the 18,000-hectare U.S. national monument, about a two-hour drive north of Portland, Ore. Many gravitate to the Johnston Ridge Visitor Center, opened in 1997 and named for a geologist killed in the blast, for a view of the crater and the volcano's lava dome. "But the best way to see the crater is to hike up to the rim," says Frenzen. "It's a long slog but a very rewarding one." The monument issues a maximum of 100 permits a day to hikers heading for the rim. About 12,000 go each year. For those who can't make it to the mountain, the mountain comes to them -- on the Internet, at: www.fs.fed.us./gpnf/mshnvm/volcanocam. 

*
July 31 2001 
Title: Mount Etna casts shadow over tourism: volcano's latest eruptions cause flow of visitors to dwindle, businesses to suffer. Author: Ljubomir Milasin 
Darkening the sky over Europe's most active volcano, Mount Etna's latest eruptions are also casting a pall over the region's thriving tourist industry at the peak of the summer season. For the third time, a rain of black volcanic ash closed the airport nearest to Mount Etna yesterday, but the lava flow appeared to be slowing. In the two weeks it has been acting up, the mountain has been full of surprises. The rivers of lava slow one day, only to speed up the next, fed by new fissures in the mountainside. Though they have yet to threaten any residents or towns, the molten streams swallowed a ski lift last week. Yesterday, red-hot lava was licking the edges of a tourist base, Rifugio Sapienza, at an altitude of nearly 2,000 metres, about halfway down the mountain slopes. Italian troops have used bulldozers to break up the asphalt in the parking lot in an attempt to create a channel that would redirect the lava away from populated areas. In the village of Nicolosi, at the mountain base, the mood is grim. The town normally thrives on tourists eager to visit the volcano, both from the rest of Italy and from overseas. Now, however, the volcanic action seems too risky for the comfort of many visitors, who normally arrive hoping to see the volcano in action. "Normally during this season we have three to 4,000 tourists a day taking the cable car up the mountain," Nicolosi Mayor Salvatore Moschetto said. "The worst thing is that we don't know when we will be able to get back to normal." The scene from the mayor's office window, featuring a lone pine tree in a dust-covered landscape, explains why. It is not just the threat posed by the eruptions and the streams of lava, but also the ashes that rain down on Nicolosi and the region downwind of the volcano that make life uncomfortable. Etna's last major eruption was in 1992. The volcano, which towers 3,310 metres above Sicily, comes to life every few months. Nicolosi, a town of 6,000 at an altitude of 700 metres, prides itself as being the gateway to Etna. There have been 300 family businesses affected by the latest eruptions which started on July 12. Structural damage to cable-car installations and the area's main road, which was cut off by lava flows, is also severe. Mr. Moschetto fears that the winter season, which attracts skiers, could also be threatened because repairs will not be carried out in time. Salvatore Mazzaglia, the head of the company that manages the sporting facilities on the volcano, said it will be two years before skiers will be able to use the site again. The government in Rome has pledged more than nine million euros ($12-million) in immediate financial assistance for villagers and business owners. It has also promised tax breaks to help the region get through the crisis. While the eruptions are trouble for the tourism industry, scientists are eager to study the mountain's actions. Paola Vanolli, a geologist with the National Institute of Geophysics and Vulcanology, said yesterday that teams are analyzing the lava and gases the mountain has been spitting out. "The emissions are being studied to understand how the volcano will behave in the future." 

*
February 20 1999 
Title: Going with the flow on an Indonesian volcano trek. 
Author: Christopher Torchia 
The guide's "Sorry, Sir" every time I tripped over a rock was just as annoying. Still, scaling the 3,726-metre Gunung Rinjani, or Rinjani Mountain, was a curious mix of hardship and pampering. With two guides and two porters lugging tents, food and bags, the biggest weight my companion and I bore was the guilt of carting nothing but a plastic water bottle. Peering from an airplane window on a clear day, it's easy to spot the corrugated slopes of volcanoes that dot the Indonesian archipelago. The cones remain shrouded in lore, symbolism and sacredness for many who live in their shadow. Indonesia has 130 active volcanoes, the most of any country in the world. With a smoke-spewing inner cone, hot springs and a crescent-shaped crater lake, Rinjani is among the grandest. It is the second-highest peak in Indonesia outside the remote, mountainous province of Irian Jaya. For travellers grown restless with a diet of beaches and sunbathing, it offers a strenuous escape from the tourist hustle of nearby Bali. Rinjani is active, last erupting in 1994 and peppering ash over much of Lombok, the tropical island it towers over. Indonesia is prone to seismic upheavals because of its location on the Pacific "Ring of Fire," a series of volcanoes and fault lines from the Americas through Japan and Southeast Asia to the South Pacific. But rain, not lava or sulphurous gases, is the real threat on Rinjani. Narrow trails turn slippery during the wet season between October and April, and hikers have lost their footing on the rocky volcano walls and perished. "How is your life today?" our chirpy guide, Rusman, chimed enthusiastically at 7 a.m. after a shivering night on the pine-studded crater rim. It takes a day to get up there, marching across waist-high savannah before the slopes surge upward into forest paths laced with tree roots. Here, the layers of mist and silence are heavy. Down in the belly of the crater, travellers bathe in scalding hot springs reputed to heal skin diseases and other ailments. Fishermen tether live catches to stakes in the lake, like pets on a leash. Many Hindu Balinese and Muslim Sasaks, who are the dominant ethnic group on Lombok, treat Rinjani as a holy place and trek there to fling rice, jewellery and other tributes into the lake. A full moon is a popular time for pilgrims. Indonesian volcanoes draw farmers because their soil is fertile and good for crops. Their terrible power inspires fear, too. In 1883, an eruption at Krakatau volcano killed more than 36,000 people. For hikers, three days and two nights of camping on Rinjani is ideal. You need an extra day to stagger up the wind-swept summit. But the path out of the crater basin is perilous enough. The usually attentive guides were absent when we crossed one stretch of fallen boulders and loose gravel. A chasm beckoned below. "I went ahead to pass water. Perhaps you are enraged?" a rueful Rusman said later. The mountaintop isolation can be fleeting. On our second day, descending into a rain forest, we pitched tents on raised wooden platforms at a campsite. Monkeys swaying in the trees were our only company. Within hours, half a dozen other climbing parties had turned the spot into a hikers' slum: campfire smoke enveloped tents, cutlery clanged on cooking pots, plates heaped with rice and chicken traded hands. At nightfall, laughter and gossip in Indonesian and a string of European tongues gave way to the grunts and snores of fitful sleepers. On the last day, driving past palm trees to a beachside hotel, we watched in alarm as a carsick Rusman leaned out the window and retched in the road. "It is because I am sad to say goodbye to you," he told us. It was an inspired bid for a bigger tip. 
*

November 10 1999 
Title: Airlines pay close attention to volcano warnings. Author: Ken Becker 
But Canadian and all other airlines pay close attention to such warnings. That's because some volcanic eruptions invade the rarefied altitudes where the big jets fly, posing a serious threat to aviation. Over the past two decades, more than 80 commercial airliners have been damaged in flight by volcanic ash. The most dramatic incident occurred 10 years ago when a KLM Boeing 747 lost all four engines while descending for refuelling in Anchorage, Alaska. It was the day after the Redoubt volcano, near Anchorage, began erupting on Dec. 14, 1989. The jumbo jet was approaching 7,600 metres when it was engulfed in an impenetrable mass of inky ash. The cockpit and cabin filled with a sulphurous odour. The pilot tried to rise from the darkness. A moment later, all four engines quit. The huge plane glided in space, gradually going down. An emergency was declared as the pilot attempted -- unsuccessfully -- seven or eight times to restart the engines. Finally, two of them kicked in at about 5,200 metres. The other two also restarted before the 747 landed safely at Anchorage. It cost about $80-million (U.S.) to repair the ash-clogged engines, other gummed-up systems and exterior damage -- the ash had sandblasted the aircraft. Three years later, another Alaska volcano, Mount Spurr, sent a giant ash cloud into the upper atmosphere. It jetted across Canada and the northern United States for three days, causing air-traffic chaos. Such incidents prompted the International Civil Aviation Organization to establish nine Volcanic Ash Advisory centres -- at Montreal; Anchorage; Washington; Buenos Aires; Darwin, Australia; Wellington, New Zealand; Tokyo; London; and Toulouse, France. Each is responsible for a geographic area. Montreal covers all of Canada, the North Atlantic west of Iceland, and the north polar region. Analyzing information they receive from satellites, volcano observatories and weather agencies, the centres forecast movements of ash clouds and pass alerts to airlines and air-traffic control centres. 
*
Globe and Mail, May 26 2001 
Title: Science: under (and inside) the volcano: (No apparent danger: the true story of volcanic disaster at Galeras and Nevado Del Ruiz; Surviving Galeras). 
Author: John Wilson
No Apparent Danger: The True Story of Volcanic Disaster at Galeras and Nevado Del Ruiz By Victoria Bruce HarperCollins, 240 pages, $39.50 Surviving Galeras By Stanley Williams and Fen Montaigne Houghton Mifflin, 270 pages, $36.95 At around 1:40 p.m. on Jan. 14, 1993, Galeras, an obscure volcano in the Central Cordillera of Colombia, erupted. It was a minor event, leaving no trace in the geological record and even going unnoticed by many people in the city at the foot of the mountain. In fact, few non-vulcanologists would ever have heard of Galeras had Stanley Williams not been leading a field trip to its summit that afternoon. The field trip turned the eruption into a disaster. In a matter of seconds, six scientists and three locals, who had hiked up to see what was going on, were dead, crushed and burned by superheated rocks thrown out of the volcano's vent. Others were injured, including Williams, who was lucky to survive the horrific damage his body suffered. Stanley Williams and the Galeras eruption are central to both No Apparent Danger and Surviving Galeras. Both books expand the story to encompass other events, but each handles that afternoon, its aftermath and Williams's responsibility very differently. Victoria Bruce is a geologist and former science writer. In No Apparent Danger, she enlarges the Galeras story to include the much larger disaster of another Colombian volcano, Nevado Del Ruiz. In 1985, a minor eruption of Nevado Del Ruiz melted part of the ice caps on the mountain's summit. Huge mud and debris flows raced down the surrounding river valleys, obliterating the town of Armero and 23,000 people. It was the second-largest volcanic disaster of the 20th century, and could easily have been avoided if the people of Armero had been educated in the dangers, if warnings had been heeded and evacuation procedures put in place. However, the disaster did focus international attention on Colombia's volcanoes, and led to the rapid development of vulcanology in that country. The scientists involved in that development are the link in Bruce's book between Nevado Del Ruiz and Galeras. No Apparent Danger is a journalistic book. It paints a broad backdrop of political power struggles, guerrilla terrorism and drug cartels, and relies heavily on quotes to tell the detailed story. This works well as far as it goes, and there is much to be learned here about these two tragedies. However, the real drama in the story is introduced only after we meet Stanley Williams on page 82. Williams is portrayed as a "notorious maverick" who believes sampling volcanic gasses is the way to predict eruptions and who is "very dismissive of seismology." Because he was leader of the ill-fated field trip, Bruce holds him responsible for ignoring seismic indications that Galeras was dangerous, not requiring safety clothes or hard hats, and not having sufficient radio communication with the base. For good measure, Williams is also portrayed as presenting himself as the sole survivor of the disaster and stealing a colleagues' work. Not surprisingly, Williams's own account in Surviving Galeras is different. Helped by Pulitzer finalist Fen Montaigne, Williams recreates, in striking detail, the day that changed his life. He intersperses his narrative with biographies of the characters and tales of famous volcanic eruptions from Vesuvius to Mount St. Helens. Surviving Galeras is a well written and intensely personal tale. It provides the reader with less background information than No Apparent Danger, but makes the main characters come much more vividly alive -- and, hence, makes their deaths more tragic. Was Williams responsible? He says no, claiming that no one could "appreciate the significance" of the seismic record, that it was not his responsibility to impose a dress code which would not have saved lives in any case, and that the party was in continuous radio contact. But there are inconsistencies in Williams's account. Bruce describes a meeting the night before the disaster in which Colombian geologists expressed apprehension about the seismic record and had their concerns dismissed by Williams. Williams makes no mention of this crucial meeting. Undoubtedly, hard hats would not have helped those caught in the throat of the erupting volcano, but Williams himself suffered a severe head injury that would almost certainly have been prevented by a hard hat. Bruce states that, without a relay radio on the rim, it is impossible to communicate directly between the Galeras crater and the seismic observatory in town. Williams placed no such relay person on the rim, yet claims that his one radio was "checking in regularly" with the observatory. Short of cancelling the field trip, which some of Williams's colleagues believe he should have done, it is unlikely that the other precautions would have made much difference. But that does not mean that they should not have been implemented. As Williams states, "One should always prepare for the worst on a volcano." He did not. Williams undoubtedly has a large ego, but that is probably neither unusual nor a handicap in the eccentric world of vulcanology. What I found disturbing was his total lack of guilt and his propensity to blame events on external sources. For him, the main cause of the disaster was a power blackout that necessitated moving the field trip back a day. No Apparent Danger and Surviving Galeras present a fascinating tale of tragedy, leavened with scientific controversy. Falling somewhere between the Stephen Jay Gould/Conway Morris altercation over the Burgess Shale, and the more dramatic debate around responsibility for the Everest tragedy of 1996, they are probably not the last word on this topic. These books obligate readers to take sides, pro- and anti-Williams, but that is part of the fun. Read them both. John Wilson is an ex-geologist whose latest book is a biography, John Franklin: Traveller on Undiscovered Seas . 

*
July 27 2001 
Title: Philippines volcano eruption could last weeks, experts say. 
LEGAZPI, PHILIPPINES -- The eruption of the Mayon volcano, which spewed towering ash columns and rocks "as big as cars" yesterday, could last up to two weeks, experts said. The eruption, which came without warning, forced more than 40,000 villagers to flee their homes in the province of Albay. No casualties were reported, but residents of the capital Legazpi, 20 kilometres from Mayon's crater, rushed out of their homes in panic as ash showers -- known as "black rain" -- fell on the city of 130,000 people, Governor Alfrancis Bichara said. "This could last for one to two weeks," chief government vulcanologist Raymundo Punongbayan said. Located 330 kilometres southeast of Manila, the volcano unleashed a series of eruptions on June 24 but subsided 10 days later. Yesterday, it blasted out ash columns reaching heights of 10 to 12 kilometres "and rocks as big as cars, if not bigger," vulcanologist Ed Laguerta said. More than 40,000 people, riding in military trucks, state-commandeered buses, pedicabs and motorcycles fled to schools serving as temporary evacuation centres around Legazpi, officials said. Flaming rocks and gases with temperatures of about 900 degrees -- hot enough to raze everything in their path -- tumbled down the slopes of the volcano at speeds of 100 kilometres an hour, scientists said. Mayon, one of the Philippines' 22 active volcanoes, has a history of 47 violent eruptions. Its deadliest blast occurred in 1814, when it buried a town under mud and rocks and killed 1,200 people. 
*
January 19 2002 
Title: Thousands flee from volcano in Congo: desperate families try to salvage what they can as lava streams from mountain. Author: Allison Lawlor 
A river of red-hot lava streamed through the eastern Congolese city of Goma yesterday, destroying everything in its path, killing dozens and forcing up to 500,000 people to flee for their lives. Shrouded in smoke and mist, men, women and children hauled rolled up mattresses, cooking pots and live chickens as they frantically tried to save what they could from the devastation caused by Central Africa's most destructive volcanic eruption in 25 years. "We're suffocating in this town, the smoke is killing us," said a 25-year-old man named Stephen, as he helped load furniture into the back of a van parked not far from the burning lava. A 50-metre-wide river of lava, in places two metres thick, cut through abandoned Goma. The port city, on the north end of Lake Kivu, is 10 kilometres from the 3,469-metre Nyiragongo volcano, which began to erupt Thursday. United Nations officials estimated 45 people had died in the 24 hours since the eruption. Rescuers found corpses where lava engulfed houses. "Fire is burning everything," said Lieutenant-Colonel Alain Pereira, a Senagalese officer with a United Nations observer force. As night fell, the sky glowed scarlet from the volcano's fires, and tremors shook buildings. Gaping holes opened up in the ground and molten rock reduced roads and buildings to fiery ash "The smell of sulphur is everywhere, there are tremors every 10 minutes," Desire Bukasa, a UN radio controller, said. "There are fissures opening up in the town which billow smoke." Aid agencies are scrambling to help the thousands of displaced people. A UN official said hundreds of thousands of people had fled across the country's borders. As fresh plumes of smoke poured from the top of the volcano, residents said the Rwandan town of Gisenyi across the border was also under threat, with magma less than three kilometres away. About 50,000 people from there were moving to the city of Ruhengeri further east. The Congolese Health Ministry asked for immediate help from the international community, including shelter and sanitation facilities, water and blankets. "This is going to be a human catastrophe," said an official of a contingent of UN observers deployed to Goma as part of efforts to end a civil war. "We have to find them shelter, put them up in camps. There's no electricity, no running water." But with the Goma airport unusable because of lava on the runway and many roads cut off, getting aid into the area will be difficult. "People haven't had any food for more than a day now," James Mathenge of the World Vision aid group said. The need for clean water is a major concern. Two of the three water purification plants in the city, which had a population of 500,000, are no longer operational, said regional spokesman with the International Committee of the Red Cross. A UN disaster-assessment team, including volcano experts, was on its way to the area yesterday. Britain pledged $4.6-million to help the disaster victims, while Belgium promised $1.7-million in emergency aid. Florian Westphal, a spokesman in Nairobi for the International Committee of the Red Cross, quoted colleagues in Goma as saying access was a big obstacle in relief efforts. "Our warehouse and workshop garages with seven trucks have been destroyed. The airport is unusable and the port in Goma has been destroyed by an explosion," he said. UN workers were in Goma and other towns in the area as part of efforts to end the three-year-old war in which Rwanda and Uganda support rebels trying to topple the Kinshasa government, which in turn is backed by Angola, Zimbabwe and Namibia. 
*
January 25 2002 
Title: Goma residents regroup in wake of volcano's fury. 
Author: Murray Campbell 
The ruins of the Virunga hospital, caught up in the flow of lava that swept through the eastern Congolese town of Goma last week, are testimony that disaster can visit more than once. The hospital was home to two clinics set up by the aid agency Christian Blind Mission International in the wake of the humanitarian crisis that overwhelmed Goma when a million people fled the genocide in neighbouring Rwanda in 1994. The clinics, which gave eye exams and did orthopedic and cataract surgeries, disappeared overnight. "There are some walls standing but nothing else survives the lava flow," said Annette Schouten-Woudstra, a CBM worker from Edmonton who witnessed the destruction. "All that you see on and around the lava is metal sheeting and the odd burnt tree trunk." But Goma, in the Democratic Republic of Congo and the centre of one humanitarian disaster after another for years, is once again picking itself up. When they are not tending burn victims, staff members of the CBM clinics are looking for temporary headquarters. Schools, churches and community centres are housing the homeless while volunteers are trying to chip roads out of the black volcanic mounds that clog the town's main streets. "They're being extremely resourceful and entrepreneurial in the midst of this huge catastrophe," said Ellen Kupp, a worker for World Vision in Goma. "I think of how long after Sept. 11 we in North America were in shock and these guys just seem to get going again." The flow of molten rock that erupted from nearby Mount Nyiragongo on Jan. 17 ran down Goma's main street and cut the town in two. The United Nations says about 35 per cent of the town was affected, displacing 70,000 people and leaving about 400,000 in need of food aid. Goma's residents initially fled to Sake, about 25 kilometres away and across the border from the Rwandan town of Gisenyi. They began returning on the weekend, even before the lava had completely cooled. Experts say the flow from Nyiragongo has stopped but sporadic small earthquakes continue to send shudders through buildings spared from the lava. A declaration on Monday that Nyiragongo's fury was spent helped convince aid agencies that it was time to start work in Goma in earnest. World Vision began distributing food and blankets to 20,000 displaced people in Sake on Tuesday. Other agencies began handing out bags of corn yesterday at points around the town centre, where a shoulder-high morass of volcanic rock blankets entire neighbourhoods. "We have no sugar, no rice, no salt, no cooking oil," said Francoise Senga, a 32-year-old mother of four waiting at a stadium for food aid. 

<#GUA>
*
Costa Rica 

Ring of fire 

First there were storm chasers, but now tourists are looking for a more explosive thrill - volcanoes that belch smoke and spew rivers of molten lava. Matthew Brace reports from fuming Arenal in Costa Rica 

Saturday February 12, 2000
 
There's something about volcanoes that brings out the child in otherwise mature travellers. It is impossible not to be thrilled when standing at the foot of a cone spitting flaming boulders and belching plumes of ash, especially at night when you can see the magma's fiery red colours. 
The heart beats fast as the ground shudders before an eruption. One belch from a smoker is never enough. Even with ultra-sensitive, multimillion-pound seismic equipment, there is still enough element of chance about volcanoes to make being in their presence exhilarating. Lately, people have been getting addicted and have begun organising their travels around hot-spots where the earth's crust is fluid and prone to violence. 
The world has about 500 active volcanoes. More than half are in the Pacific Ocean, in what is known as the Ring of Fire - Indonesia has about 70, Central America roughly 60 and Japan around 45. A search on the internet will bring up a healthy-looking list of tours and accommodation from Hawaii to Indonesia and Iceland to Costa Rica. 
The Costa Ricans are deeply proud of their most famous volcano, Arenal, a shapely cinder cone that rises into the clouds from t he rainforest around its base. Climbing it is forbidden and only the truly foolhardy would try. My guide spared no detail when telling me about four German tourists who ventured up a few years ago and were killed instantly when they were struck by a still-burning giant boulder blown from deep within the crater. Visitors can, however, get quite close in relative safety by taking a trail from the Tabacon Resort near the pretty town of La Fortuna. 
The trek would not look out of place in an Indiana Jones film: the opening shot would be the security sign - beyond here your travel insurance runs out. The path leads through a cutting in a snake-infested forest. Miniature motorways of leaf-cutter ants cross the path and howler monkeys whoop it up in the trees on either side. Towering over everything is Arenal. 
The trail leads to a clearing and a small beach of fine grey rock and sand - crushed particles from an old lava flow. A rock thrown in the air thuds on the sand and echoes underground. This is the roof of a giant subterranean complex of caverns leading to the central magma chamber bubbling at ferocious temperatures and, on occasion, pumping its bile up the volcano's oesophagus. 
Beyond this lies an almost vertical 60ft wall of loose lava and boulders - this is as far as the last lava flow reached. The wall is climbable with great care but, once on top, walking is near impossible. From here, the eruptions (mainly ash plumes) are clearly visible and accompanied by great booms that shudder through the valley and resound in the pit of the stomach. 
Seconds later, a clatter and rush of rocks down the cone signals the fall of boulders. The rocks leave puffs of smoke as they bounce down the mountain towards you. Their final resting-place is still several thousand yards away but, as these boulders measure up to 50ft across and travel at about 70mph, it seems like spitting distance. 
At night, the view from the hot spring-water pools at the Tabacon Resort is spectacular, but the place does get crowded and you will have to share it with noisy, boozy American tourists bawling every time the mountain spits fire. Just repeat loudly enough that a full eruption would see a river of lava sprint down the valley and vaporise their margaritas in about a minute and a half. That should shut them up. 
True volcano addicts watch in silent awe, then retire to their room at the nearby Tilajari Resort to celebrate with an ice-cold beer and plan which of the planet's smokers to head to next year. 
The practicals
Matthew Brace travelled with Valle Dorado Tours (00 506 228 9932, e-mail: vdorado@sol.racsa.co. cr.)
He stayed at the Grano de Oro (255 3322, granoro@ sol. racsa.co.cr) and San Jose Palacio (220 2034,palacio@sol. racsa.co.cr) in San Jose, and the Tilajari Resort (details from Valle Dorado) near Arenal.
Travel agents offer fares with BA (0345 222111) from £580. Also American Airlines (0345 789789) from £560, and Continental (0800 776464) from £698.

Burnt offerings . . . . volcanoes around the world

Emma Owen

Many of the Caribbean islands (Martinique, St Lucia, St Vincent, ) promote their volcanoes as day-trip destinations. If you want to go independently, contact the relevant tourist boards. The Caribbean Tourism Organisation is on 0171-222 4335. 
In Hawaii, it is possible to fly over Kilauea volcano by helicopter. Hilo Wings, e-mail: info@hilowings.com. 
The Philippines has 37 volcanoes, 18 of them active. Mount Mayon in Legaspi, South Luzon, is one of the more famous ones, along with Mount Pinatubo in central Luzon. Both Blue Horizons Travel and Tours (00 632 893 6071), and Interisland Travel and Tours (00 632 522 1405) organise sightseeing trips. Over here, the Philippine Department of Tourism is on 0171-835 1100. 
Japan has more than its fair share of volcanoes, with a major eruption every 20 years or so. Mount Fuji is an obvious and busy destination, but a hike through the Kirishima National Park allows you to stroll through 15km of lunar landscape, volcanic lakes, hot springs and waterfalls. Maps for the various walks can be collected at the tourist offices in Ebino-kogen and Takachihogawara, or contact the main tourist information office in Tokyo on 00 813 34 31 13 51. Here, the Japan National Tourist Organisation is on 0171-734 9638. 
In Indonesia , the mountains' eruptions are seen as a sign of anger from the gods. Gunung Bromo, on Java, has an annual festival when offerings are thrown into the crater in an attempt to pacify the gods. Organised tours can be arranged from the main tourist centres in Bali and Java. The Indonesian Tourist Office is on 0900 1600180. 
Mount Etna, in Italy, is Europe's largest active volcano. Tourist visits to the craters are restricted - when it blew in 1983, it took the tourist centre with it. Vesuvius is potentially the most dangerous, as the surrounding area is densely populated - emergency plans recommend the evacuation of 600,000 people in the event of rumblings. The tourist centre at Linguaglossa (for Etna) is on 00 39 095 64 30 94 and at Pompeii (for Vesuvius) on 00 39 081 850 72 55. The Italian tourist office in Britain is on 0900 1600280. 
Iceland sits precariously on top of the mid-Atlantic rift, and some 11% of the country is made up of lava fields. Active volcanoes include Eldfell on the Isle of Heimaey, Surtsey, Grimsvötn and Krafla. The tourist office in the UK is on 0171-590 1100. 

*
Under the volcano 

An eruption once nearly wiped out the human race. Bill McGuire reports 

Thursday February 3, 2000
 
Volcanoes are unique among natural hazards in that they can kill, maim, and destroy in a remarkably diverse number of unpleasant ways. Although for most people volcanoes mean one thing only - flows of molten lava - these are actually the least dangerous of all volcanic phenomena and are formed during the quietest volcanic events known as effusive eruptions. 
Lavas are highly effective in bulldozing buildings and roads and inundating agricultural land but rarely kill. Most move so slowly that one can simply walk away from them. The really nasty volcanic hazards are generated during much more violent explosive blasts that are sometimes energetic enough to shatter a volcano entirely, sending gigantic plumes of gas and debris into the stratosphere. 
The reason some volcanoes explode with such violence is that the molten magma that feeds them is particularly rich in gas - mainly steam, but also containing carbon dioxide and sulphur gases. While the magma remains beneath the surface, this gas remains dissolved in the liquid magma, rather like the carbon dioxide in a bottle of soda before the cap is broken. In the same way that bubbles pop into existence and froth upwards when the bottle cap is removed, so the gas contained in a body of magma forms bubbles that explode outwards and upwards when the seal on a simmering volcano is broken. 
The amount of energy involved is trillions of times greater, and within fractions of a second the bubbles rip the magma to shreds and blast it tens of kilometres into the atmosphere faster than a Concorde. The magma fragments may pour down the flanks of the volcano as hurricane-force blasts of superheated gas and semi-molten ash known as pyroclastic flows or be carried far and wide to rain down as ash hundreds or even thousands of kilometres away. Shock waves from the blast may flatten everything within thousands of square kilometres while rains triggered by the eruption turn the ash into destructive torrents of mud. 
Around 50 volcanoes explode every year, but their impact is normally confined to the vicinity of the blast. About every hundred years on average - a volcano explodes with enough violence to hurl its sulphur gases into the stratosphere where they slowly spread out across the planet, cutting out some of the sun's radiation and lowering surface temperatures. In this way the 1991 eruption of Pinatubo in the Philippines cooled the Earth by about half a degree Celsius, while the 1815 blast of the Indonesian volcano, Tambora, led to the bitterly cold "Year without a summer" in North America and Europe. Volcanologists have known for some time that even the Tambora catastrophe pales into insignificance beside the greatest volcanic explosions. 
Fortunately only a couple of these super-eruptions occur every hundred millennia. Somewhat worryingly, however, the last great blast was over 70,000 years ago when a super-volcano blew its top at Toba in Sumatra. The gases contained in the magma beneath this part of Indonesia were under such incredible pressures that in perhaps less than a day they blasted out enough debris to bury greater London - from Slough in the west to Romford in the east - to a depth four times the height of Canary Wharf. 
Along with the gigantic volumes of ash, sulphur gases were blasted more than 50 kilometres into the stratosphere, where they mixed with atmospheric water to form up to five billion tonnes of sulphuric acid. 
As the sun struggled to penetrate a global veil of dust and acid, temperatures plummeted by perhaps five degrees Celsius and the planet was plunged for years into deepest volcanic winter. Recent biological evidence paints a terrifying picture of how our ancestors fared. 
Examination of mitochondrial DNA from human cells shows that it varies much less than expected across the peoples of the Earth. In other words all humans, whatever their race or colour, are - genetically speaking - very similar, much more so than they should be given the length of time they have lived on the planet. 
The horrifying explanation for this is that around the time of the great Toba blast, human beings were almost wiped out. Only a few thousand survived from which all six billion souls on planet Earth are descended. Whether or not the appalling legacy of Toba was responsible for taking our race to the brink of extinction remains to be confirmed, but this apocalyptic blast is the best candidate we have. 
With the next super-eruption technically overdue, perhaps the government should be looking not to the stars but beneath our feet for the source of the next global catastrophe. 
Supervolcanoes is broadcast as part of the BBC2 Horizon series at 9.30pm tonight 
 Bill McGuire is the Benfield Greig professor of geohazards and director of the Benfield Greig Hazard Research Centre at University College London. His new book Apocalypse: A Natural History Of Global Disasters is published in paperback by Cassell at £14.
*
Why the cracks in the volcano's slopes warn of total devastation explosion 
Volcanic activity reports 

James Meek, Science correspondent 
Thursday April 6, 2000
 
The plume of ash roiling into the air out of Mount Usu looks awesome enough. But it is all the more fearful when you realise that Usu is a mere junior branch of a much larger volcano, Toya, on whose rim it lies. 
Fortunately, there now seems little chance of a repeat of the gigantic eruption which ripped open the earth's crust where Toya lies, leaving a lake. 
But Toya's power lives on in the regular eruptions of smaller volcanoes like Usu. What Japanese scientists, admired as some of the world's most experienced volcano-watchers, now fear is a fresh explosion leading to the devastating phenomenon known as "pyroclastic flow." 
The danger signs are the cracks appearing on the slopes of the volcano below where the most recent explosions have taken place. 
This suggests that the molten rock just beneath the surface - called magma when it is inside the volcano, lava when it it outside - is forming a lava dome, a cap of hardening rock plugging the efforts of the magma to burst out. 
It is this build-up of pressure, combined with rock falling off the steepening sides of the lava dome, which could be violently released by a new explosion and a pyroclastic flow. 
This is an avalanche of hot gas, rock and ash which races from the flanks of the volcano down neighbouring river valleys at speeds of up to 90mph, laying waste to any people, animals or vegetation unfortunate enough to be in its path. 
Moving above and with the avalanche is an "ash cloud surge", a cloud of superheated ash which can spread destruction far beyond the main flow. 
The devastation is sudden and unpredictable, if localised, hence the need for evacuation. 
Between 1995 and 1997, the growth and collapse of lava domes and the subsequent explosions and pyroclastic flows from the Soufriere Hills volcano devastated entire communities and the airport on the island of Montserrat. 
Residents, who were ordered to retreat in successive evacuations, were stunned - the volcano had not erupted in 400 years. 
Mount Usu's rumblings come as less of a surprise - the volcano last erupted 22 years ago. 

*
Impatience tempts volcano refugees into danger 

Japanese evade roadblocks to tend crops and recover valuables 

Jonathan Watts
Saturday April 8, 2000
 
Refugees from the Mount Usu volcano are slipping into the police-guarded exclusion zone as they begin to doubt expert forecasts of a devastating new eruption. 
A week after the relatively minor release of gas and ash last week, the town of Date, three miles from the volcano, resembles a scene from a Godzilla film: television helicopters constantly buzz overhead, military vehicles line the side streets, and thousands of refugees huddle in evacuation centres.
But the new peak that vulcanologists say will soon rise out of the ground in a devastating explosion of molten rock and superheated gas has still to appear, and it is increasingly disputed whether it ever will.
Refugees who fled in terror a week ago are starting to sneak past the police blockades into the danger zone to check their houses, feed their pets and tend their crops.
"It's easy to understand why they return," said Takamachi Kimura, one of the 500 people bedding down in the giant hall of Date's culture centre. "We're fed up with waiting. Nobody knows if this situation will last a month, half a year, or for ever."
Yesterday the volcano was quiet, puffing just the occasional milky white cloud into the otherwise clear blue sky. Approaching its most distant slopes, the only signs of activity were the pungent smell of sulphur dioxide and a layer of brown-grey ash on nearby trees and fields.
It is a far cry from last week, when violent earthquakes rattled homes twice an hour in a terrifying prelude to the eruption on Friday, which sent a plume of gas and ash almost two miles into the air.
But even that failed to impress many refugees, who remember the last eruption in 1978, when Mt Usu belched smoke six miles into the sky and three people were killed.
Residents of Date, Abuta and Sobetsu, the towns that ring the mountain, are arguably more used to such disasters than anyone in Japan, a country with 86 active volcanoes.
The earth in this part of the world is rarely still. Mt Usu blows its top every few decades, throwing up new peaks, such as the 400-metre (1,300ft) Showa Shinzen, which suddenly became a neighbour of Date city in 1942 and 1943.
Rather than inspiring terror, the frequency of volcanic activity seems to have bred familiarity and, in some cases, complacency. Even in Japan, where land is at a premium, there is amazement that the Koya hot spring resort in Abuta was built on an area overlapping Mt Usu's northern slopes.
But the resort owes its existence to a huge eruption in 1910, which opened a channel to a source of hot underground water for the onsen (spas) which attract hundreds of thousands of tourists each year.
What the volcano created it is now taking away. Craters have appeared on the edge of the town and cracks up to 30ft wide have swallowed houses.
Although the tremors have more or less stopped, measurements taken by satellite indicate that the expansion and contraction of the earth is accelerating.
According to Mitsuhiro Nakagawa, a professor at Hokkaido University, these are signs that an underground lava dome will push its way to the surface within the next two weeks.
He said there was a strong danger that such an eruption would produce pyroclastic flows of molten rock, which travel at speeds of more than 60mph, incinerating every thing in their paths. "It is very similar to what happened during the eruption of 1910," he said. "You have to know your history."
Residents are more concerned about economics. Far mers are frustrated at being away from their fields in their most important season. According to one agricultural cooperative, 30%of the crops in the exclusion zone are already ruined and this will rise to 70% by next week. Farmers and fishermen have petitioned the authorities to lift the entry ban.
With the mountain now apparently docile, refugees say they are tempted to return home to pick up valuables - nobody is insured against volcano damage - and bedding to make life more comfortable in the evacuation centres.
"I just want me and the kids to be able to sleep on a proper futon," said Hiroko Ishi, a mother of three, who only had time to grab nappies for her baby when she was evacuated. The family now occupy the space of a few blankets on the hard floor of a gymnasium.
"I'm exhausted, especially mentally. Not knowing how long this will last is extremely stressful."
For the moment, most still accept the validity of the official warnings, not least because they remember the last eruption, when lava stones the size of pingpong balls rained down on Date.
But as the boredom and tension of waiting increase, the most common prayer is for Mt Usu to make up its mind.
"I just wish the volcano would get on with it: either destroy my house or let me go back," said Ken Homata, who works in a hot-spring hotel. "The volcano created our business, but now it just seems to be playing with our existence."

*
Under the volcano 

The British government's inadequate response to the crisis in Montserrat is criticised in a new report 

Polly Pattullo 
Friday May 5, 2000
 
The 5,000 or so remaining residents of Montserrat, afflicted since July 1995 by the eruption of the Soufriere Hills volcano, are now settling down to the demanding task of rebuilding a society in the safe northern corner of their tiny eastern Caribbean island. Yet two-thirds of the island remains out of bounds, still threatened by the volcano: abandoned communities have become ash-ridden ghost-towns or, worse still, have been buried under the millions of tonnes of volcanic rubble. The capital, Plymouth, has been virtually destroyed. 
While the trauma of seeing homes and businesses devastated has begun to ease, the lessons learned from this unprecedented natural disaster in one of Britain's last remaining colonies are only just beginning to be articulated. What is clear is that unfinished colonial business returns to haunt. 
During the crisis, perceptions in Montserrat took on a colonial model of mistrust. At the worst moments, many Montserratians believed that the UK was deliberately seeking to "depopulate" the island, either completely or sufficiently enough to reduce HMG's financial burden. As a Montserratian journalist said: "We felt that one day we would wake up and a British ship would come and take us off." The British always denied this (a fact supported by the official records), maintaining that given its priority to protect lives it had to make contingency plans for a worst-case scenario - off-island evacuation. That this was interpreted negatively by Montserratians reflects the complexities of the emergency and the inadequacy of some of Britain's responses. 
The first inquiry into the volcano crisis was by the House of Commons select committee for international development in late 1997, in the wake of escalat ing hardship on the island. That June, 19 people had been killed by the volcano; in August came the comments from Clare Short, minister for international development, that the islanders would be wanting "golden elephants next". The despair increased as the danger from the volcano forced further evacuations. 
The select committee report, trenchant in its criticism of both the British government and the government of Montserrat, recommended that the Department for International Development (DFID) commission a "frank and impartial" report - to assess what had happened and what lessons could be learned. Undertaken by a team from the Overseas Development Institute, a detailed two-volume report, An Evaluation of HMG's Response to the Montserrat Volcanic Emergency, has just been published. 
It describes its main findings thus: "An achievement for Montserratians and a qualified success for HMG". Accolades go to the Montserratians for having coped with the "continuing volcanic menace that was wholly outside their experience". There is less enthusiasm for the British government's role, although it describes the disaster response as "a success in comparison with many other recent natural disasters elsewhere in the developing world". 
O ne exceptional quality of the problems facing Montserrat was uncertainty. What would the volcano do next? An effect of such uncertainty, as this even-handed evaluation points out, "allowed different strategies to be promoted by key stakeholders", with a feeling on the Montserratian side that DFID was "acting ungenerously" by looking at cheaper solutions to address immediate needs rather than taking a longer-term perspective. Earlier, both "sides" had adopted a "wait and see" policy: Montserrat because it was desperate not to see the island slide into virtual economic close -down, Britain because it could thereby limit its financial commitments. The denial - from both perspectives - ill-served the people of Montserrat. 
One of the most important points to emerge from this evaluation is that while overseas territories like Montserrat retain a "first call" on DFID's development programme, there is neither a budgetary ceiling nor agreed standards for the provision of housing, education and so on. In Montserrat, this led to considerable friction between the two governments. The island authorities, for example, criticised the housing relief as "socially, culturally and structurally unacceptable", particularly in relation to the public shelters with primitive sanitary conditions, overcrowding and little privacy. While Montserrat is not the "first world", it had enjoyed a good lifestyle remote from the poorest of the poor (the group targeted by DFID for priority aid). 
And then there are the institutional weaknesses of colonial structures. In a bizarre tripartite arrangement, neither the governor (the Foreign Office), DFID nor the government of Montserrat had "clear authority for many of the decisions which had to be taken". The effect was "delays, omissions and shortcomings", especially in the early days. What was re quired was not a reactive, learn-as-you-go approach but a more ambitious task force strategy, says the evaluation. 
And so planning for the future remains largely unresolved: how to plan the quantity and quality of housing, health care, education for an unknown size of population? How to reduce dependency when the economy has collapsed? What could stimulate investment? And always, there remain the uncertainties of the still-active volcano, which continues to cast its shadow over the lives of Montserratians, both on the island and in the diaspora. 
And, indeed, over Whitehall - forced through disaster to examine its responsibilities to a colony in crisis. 
Polly Pattullo is the author of Fire from the Mountain: the Tragedy of Montserrat (Constable, £9.99) comment@guardian.co.uk 

*
Dominica 

The day the earth boiled 

Chasing volcanoes is a risky business as some tourists discovered at Mount Etna last week. But the thrill of watching the earth move is a powerful draw. Polly Pattullo goes to the edge of the Boiling Lake 

Saturday June 17, 2000

 When Henry Nicholls, a British-born doctor and agriculturalist, claimed to have "discovered" Dominica's Boiling Lake in 1875, he recounted his exploits in the Illustrated London News as if he had just returned from a major imperial expedition to the head of the Nile. The local newspaper made fun of him - for while he was the first person to write an account of his adventure, hunters and map-makers had, of course, long known about this boiling volcanic cauldron in the heart of Dominica's stupendous rainforest wilderness. 
Even so, those who these days make the trek to the Boiling Lake might sympathise just a jot with the old colonial's vanity. For to go there -and return - is to feel excitement and a hint of anxiety (before), exhaustion and amazement (during) and exhilaration and more exhaustion (after). So what is it that makes it the stuff of legends (with its own "I survived" site on the internet)? 
The world's second largest boiling lake (New Zealand has the largest), its surface churnings hint at an unstable, shuddering earth below. For Dominica, along with many of its eastern Caribbean neighbours, is volcanic. Such a geology gives the island rippling mountain ranges, deep fertile valleys dense with a dazzling greenness, and water galore - streaming from rivers that plunge down waterfalls or ripple contentedly like a Scottish trout stream. 
You can know the island backwards but never know it all. The green-blanketed interior invokes an African heartland rather than an island a good deal smaller than the Isle of Wight. Hidden within these forests are sulphur springs, patches of boiling mud, fumeroles, multi-coloured streams, crater lakes, underwater hot springs and, of course, the Boiling Lake itself, deep inside the Morne Trois Pitons National Park, now a Unesco world heritage site. 
There are ambitious plans for a great long-distance hiking trail - a tropical challenge to, say, the Pennine Way. But for now, the Boiling Lake is the island's ultimate trial of strength. The one route to the Lake starts from the ridge-top village of Laudat, embalmed in sweet cooling breezes. Leave behind until your return the hot and cold delights of Titou Gorge, a sort of base camp, with its own residents, the eccentric Dr Fix-It and Sulphur, the hiking cat. And set out into the rainforest glades that are the glory of Dominica - tree ferns glittering in sun or rain, the straight-as-an-arrow trunks of the gommier, and chataigners with giant buttresses. Through the green are glimpses of the gaudy yellow-red bracts of the heliconia plant. And yet this is only "secondary" forest - a mere 20 years old, born after Hurricane David blasted its way through the island in 1979 turning green to brown hours. 
But Dominica replenishes itself fast, back to a familiar tangled, green warm-wet blanket. As Hagan Dorivea, our conscientious guide, explained, the fertility of the soil, the rain, the heat means that Dominica is a place where "one stop and you grow". So no stopping for the first hour or so until a drink from the waters of the Breakfast River. And then toiling up and up again on to the narrow ridge of Morne Nicholls. Here, the forest gives way to tough, wind-battered vegetation where the cloud cover sweeps down without warning, obliterating a view that stretches back to Laudat and down to the sea and the little coastal capital, Roseau. Then the clouds dissolved and way in front of us, but beyond one more ridge or perhaps even two, was a glimpse not of the lake itself but of steam bursting from within its green-encircled crater. 
But before you reach the Lake, you must cross the macabre Valley of Desolation. After a punishingly-steep descent, we reached a flat, bleak basin, stripped of vegetation except for mosses and ferns and surrounded by brown scree. Yet the valley seemed alive: with a whooshing sound from clouds of sulphur that rise from fumeroles; streams come and go, rocks are the colour of stained-glass windows, bubbling waters emerge inky-black or dribble milk, or flow primrose-yellow from sulphur, or orange from iron. 
By then, there was a sense of urgency to push on to the Lake itself. Another hour perhaps and then, in a final burst of energy, we reached the cliffs that edge the crater and peered through the sulphurous steam that swirls off its surface. That day, sitting above the steaming crater, I could see that its muddy, milk-white waters were calm at the edges and boiling turbulently at its centre. "Seething like a huge cauldron, so utterly unlike anything I had ever seen in nature," wrote a British visitor in 1900. 
Indeed, that is how it has seemed to me the three times that I have made it to the Lake. But not always: it can be pale-green and glassy; or grey and stormy, and despite its "boiling" reputation (people have been seriously burned by its waters and two at least killed by poisonous fumes), a friend of mine, amazingly, once swam in it - on a day when the water had been tepid, almost cold. 
But there there was little time for contemplation at the Lake before starting out on the return hike. This included an idyllic rest-stop, a bathe in a tiny, milky, wayside pool with its own warm waterfall. Then the ascents and descents, but by then the narrow green ridges were filled with afternoon sunlight and the peaks on either side rose up like a child's spiky drawing. And eventually (six to seven hours is an average time for the trek), we were back at Titou Gorge, greeted by teenagers having fun jumping into the calm waters of its mouth. Sulphur the cat was still waiting for company or food and there was the self-styled Dr Fix-It tending his vegetable garden. A local farmer locked in some impenetrable battle over land ownership, he is a man of many moods - sometimes angry, sometimes placid. Not unlike the Boiling Lake itself. 
Other volcanic hot spots in the eastern Caribbean 
This "necklace" of islands lies at the point of convergence of two tectonic plates. There are at least 17 live volcanoes - of which 10 are on Dominica - stretching from Saba, in the north, to Kick 'Em Jenny, the submerged volcano near Grenada, in the south. The first recorded volcanic event in the Caribbean occurred in St Kitts in 1692. 
Some of the most intriguing volcanoes in the eastern Caribbean include: 
Martinique: The worst catastrophe in the Caribbean's volcano history was in May 1902, when Mont Pelée erupted and some 40,000 people were killed in the coastal town of St Pierre, known as the Paris of the Antilles. The town has been rebuilt, although the ruins of the theatre remain. Visit the fascinating museum about the volcano, and hike to the summit of the now tranquil Pelée itself. Information on Martinique from the French Tourist Office (0906 8244123). 
Montserrat: Since July 1995, the Soufriere Hills volcano has been active for the first time in recorded history. Roughly two-thirds of the island remains in the "exclusion zone", although day-time visits can sometimes be made to the abandoned outskirts of the capital, Plymouth, for an awesome view (when the clouds lift) of the volcano dome and the route of the pyroclastic flows that poured into Plymouth in 1997. 
On the other side of the island, from a viewing point at Jack Boy Hill, look down to the abandoned airport where flows reached the southern edge of the runway. From there, you can also see the route down Mosquito Ghaut, where the lava killed 19 people in June 1997 after burying several communities. Visitors are welcome at the Montserrat Volcano Observatory (telephone in advance). Montserrat Tourist Board: 020-7242 3131. 
St Lucia: The famous Pitons, twin volcanic peaks, south of the village of Soufriere (named after the French word for sulphur) are the most dramatic examples of St Lucia's volcanic past. Nearby is a somewhat over-rated "drive-in volcano", where visitors admire steaming sulphur springs. St Lucia Tourist Board: 020-7431 3675. 
St Vincent: The Soufriere volcano erupted twice in the 20th century - in 1902 when 1,500 people were killed and in 1979. Start the hike from the north-east corner of the island, at the Rabacca Dry River. It's about a two-hour hike to the 700ft deep crater, one mile across. The last part involves crunching over the bare upper slopes of rock and ash. Take a guide. No nearby accommodation - the nearest is in the capital, Kingstown. St Vincent and the Grenadines Tourist Board: 020-7937 6570. 
Guadeloupe: In 1976, an increase in activity at the La Soufriere volcano on Basse Terre prompted a temporary evacuation of 70,000 people. Photographs and information about that mini-crisis can be seen at Maison du Volcan, on the flanks of the volcano. Then take the trail for a two-hour there-and-back hike to the summit. Best to go on a clear day. Scientific monitoring continues. Contact the French Tourist Office (0906 8244123). 

*
The defiance of science 

Last night's TV: Gareth McLean 

Tuesday October 24, 2000
 
Volcanoes, like dinosaurs, exert a primal fascination over humanity. While the memories of ancient cave-dwelling ancestors perhaps still hide embedded in our neural pathways ("Tree, good. Fire, bad", that kind of thing) and keep us genetically in awe of volcanoes, that wouldn't explain our enchantment with dinosaurs. Most likely, our obsession is due to the awesome, slightly fantastical nature of both dinosaurs and volcanoes, their actual existence an affront to our fanatical ordering and taming of the world. They appeal to a deep-rooted, subliminal masochism, a desire for disorder and mayhem: the defiance of science. 
Hence these days, humanity's fascination with giant lizards and flaming mountains mainly manifests itself in small boys of a certain age, who enjoy the notion of chaos. Such boys - I am speaking from experience here - draw tableau upon tableau of dinosaurs and volcanoes whenever the opportunity of being alone with a set of Berol felt tip pens arises. (Crayola crayons, I have always been convinced, are for girls, since the colours have names just like lipsticks.) In these drawings, the dinosaurs are sometimes fighting on the slopes of volcanoes. Sometimes they are running from the flowing lava and the falling ash and very occasionally - perhaps after too much orange juice - the dinosaurs are eating the volcanoes whole. (They were big dinosaurs and orange juice contained excessive tartrazine in those days.) 
In a strange parallel universe then, I might have turned out like John Seach, a volcanologist who braves noxious clouds of gas, showers of volcanic rocks and smothering rivers of ash to study his chosen subject up close. Volcano (Channel 4) followed John and his colleagues up the slopes of active volcanoes ("If the volcano blew now, John and Geoff [the cameraman] would be incinerated"), down the deserted streets of a town in the shadow of a brewing, spewing volcano ("We need to get out of here now"), to acid lakes ("More corrosive than battery acid") and underwater to examine lava flows ("Blub, blub, ooh, hot"). 
Volcano didn't cover any ground that a hundred previous documentaries on the subject haven't, but such is the allure of volcanoes themselves, that hardly mattered. It is for the spectacle as well as the science that we watch programmes about super-natural phenomena. John and his ilk may seem like graduates from the Homer Simpson School of Doing Sensible Activities, but their bravery/stupidity is something we all envy slightly. Were it not for the likelihood of a horrible burning death, who wouldn't want to adventure like a volcanologist, if only to see lava up close. (I have always thought lava looks edible. If they ever invent raspberry treacle, it will look like lava.) 
Ruby (BBC1) was up close and personal with Roseanne in the first of a 12-part series of conversations over drinks and dinner. (This is a great and underused format which would be really good if, each week, Ruby - or whoever - had a different telly chef make her and her guests a meal before they sat down to a jolly discussion. Parkinson meets Ready Steady Cook, if you will.) An encounter between Ruby and Roseanne could so easily have descended into a competition - of the who-can-strip-paint-with-their-voice-quicker variety - but both women were surprisingly restrained, with the result that a revealing, funny and tender chat developed. Thanks to sparky chemistry, Ruby turned out to be an invigorating watch and could be accorded the highest compliment for a chat show. At 40 minutes, it seemed too short. 
Only one thing niggled and that was the identity and purpose of the mysterious couple who were sitting at the other table in Ruby's restaurant? Friends? Lovers? Business partners? Researchers put there to fill an empty space? Whatever, if they thought they were having an illicit meeting, boy are they mistaken. 
The Teapot Incident (when Handy Andy and the lovely but shrieky Linda Barker managed to destroy a participant's prized collection of - admittedly hideous - teapots by putting them on shoddy shelves which promptly collapsed) marked an all-time low in designer-participant relations on Changing Rooms (BBC1). Amazingly, members of the public are still letting them into their homes. That isn't the biggest shock however. It would seem Carol Smillie isn't pregnant. 

*
Popo exhales behind a smokescreen 

Locals scorn warning of Mexican mega eruption 

Jo Tuckman in Santiago Xalitzintla
Tuesday November 21, 2000
 
Billowing plumes of sulphur dioxide, water vapour and ash have been shooting miles up into the sky from Popocatepetl's crater for weeks. But Antonio Analco has nothing but disdain for the official alert. 
"I know nothing is going to happen," he says. 
Don Antonio is a shaman and rainmaker and the Mexican volcano's "spirit" comes to him in dreams, personified as an old man called Don Gregorio - Don Goyo for short. 
"If Don Goyo warns me, then I'll warn everybody else. These scientists and their instruments are a big con trick." 
Don Antonio's village, Santiago Xalitzintla, nestles about seven miles from the crater on the volcano's north-eastern flank. It would almost certainly be wiped out by the avalanche of sludge and acidic gases surging down the canyons at more than 60mph which is likely to accompany a major eruption, even before the lava reached it. 
Geologists believe that this last happened 1,200 years ago, and none of the experts are predicting a repeat. They think Popo's huffing and puffing may intensify to the point of producing incandescent material, but they do not expect the sacred mountain of the Aztecs to blow. 
But they could be wrong. The prediction that Pinatubo volcano in the Philippines would erupt in 1991 is the only significant example of accurate scientific forecasting. 
"At Popo they just don't know what's going to happen, and it is not for want of trying; but it's the same problem we face with any volcano," says Jim Luhr a volcanologist from the Smithsonian Institution in Washington DC. 
"What we get up to is barely a science." 
So why bother trying? asks Don Rufino, standing in front of the 5,465-metre (17,930ft) symmetrical cone."If the volcano decides it's time, we won't have time to do anything about it." 
He is more worried about soldiers enforcing the ban on going within six miles of the crater, which prevents villagers reaching their fields to harvest their maize. 
The National Disaster Prevention Centre says that about 30,000 people living in the nearest villages are at serious risk from a major eruption. There are about 300,000 people in the second-tier danger zone, and 800,000 in the entire risk area, while the tens of millions in Mexico City to the north-west and Puebla to the east could be affected by ash clouds. 
This is why Popocatepetl is the most closely monitored of Mexico's 14 active volcanoes, with a special unit in the capital to keep a 24-hour watch on it. 
Instruments on the mountain relay the seismic activity caused by smoke exhalations and deep molten-rock movements, tiny increases in volume which could indicate the build-up of pressure, and changes in the the gases emitted. 
"We are pretty certain to see a big one coming hours to days before it actually happens," says Enrique Guevara, the unit's coordinator, pointing to the automatic alarm systems which would give the signal to evacuate the area. 
But people on the volcano are often reluctant to abandon their houses and animals. 
"They can keep their shelters and their second-hand clothes. I'm not going," says Dona Ines. 
She has bad memories of the last and only evacuation in December 1994, when the volcano awoke after being dormant for almost 70 years. 
"The volcano is only breathing. It has always smoked," she says. 
Popocatepetl smoked for the Aztecs, in whose mythology it was a torch-bearing warrior mourning his dead love - a nearby volcano called Iztaccihuatl, which resembles a reclining woman. 
It smoked when the Spanish conquistador Hernan Cortes passed by on his way to the Aztec capital, and it went through several heavy puffing bouts in subsequent centuries, with the last one in 1921. 
The 1994 reawakening, the scientists say, was triggered by a new injection of molten rock into the magma chamber, and the current intensification of activity is due to the formation of a lava dome inside the crater which is obstructing the regular release of energy. 
But although Popocatepetl even means "smoking mountain" in the indigenous Nahuatl language, its main sacred function is its relationship to water, and it particular the pre-Colombian rain god Tlaloc. 
"The conquest suppressed the large-scale rituals but the small community rites to bring rain or keep away bad weather continue until today," says Julio Glokner, an anthropologist, who has been traipsing up and down the volcano after Don Antonio and other shamans since 1989. 
Every community on Popocatepetl has its traditions and every rainmaker his or her own style. 
In Don Antonio's dreams Don Goyo asks for specific offerings that are carried up to mountain shrines. In recent years these have included a business suit, an accordion and a warrior costume. 
Don Antonio says he would be willing to talk to the scientists in Mexico City, but "only if they are willing to listen to what I have to say too". 
But it is not just the experts who are loathe to rely on the shaman's confidence that the volcano would not erupt without telling him first. 
"I've been a sceptic ever since I was a little boy. I used to throw things at their rituals," says Raul Sanchez, whose family has lived for decades in Amecameca on the side of the volcano. 
He has worked out his own system for understanding the clouds around the summit, and has collected ash samples to investigate the probability of a major eruption. 
He believes that Popocatepetl may erupt, but not on his side of the mountain. 
"I do this to see whether we really have to start running or not, and the truth is we don't." 

*
Villages deserted as Popo spits red 

Jo Tuckman in Cholula
Thursday December 21, 2000
 
With red hot rocks spewing from the crater of Mexico's Popocatepetl volcano for the second night running, and no end in sight to the mountain's most dramatic eruptive phase in more than 500 years, tens of thousands of people face a prolonged exile from villages dotted around the danger zone. 
"When the volcano started spitting fire we realised we couldn't wait any longer and had to leave," explained Adolfo Flores, 16, from the safe distance of a school-turned-shelter in the colonial town of Cholula, famed for its stunning views of Popocatepetl. 
Like many from the poor villages at the volcano's feet which are most at risk if the eruptions prompt a major lava flow or avalanche of acidic sludge, Adolfo's family had ignored evacuation calls over the weekend. 
"When there were just the white and grey plumes coming out of the crater we thought we didn't need to worry," he said, displaying generations of collective memory in which periodic phases of intensified exhalations were dismissed as unthreatening heavy breathing. "But then the volcano showed that this was something different this time, something serious." 
Popo, as the mountain is commonly known, had been pouring out water vapour and ash for days, but a dome of lava inside the crater had blocked the release of the energy, triggering the first eruptive episode on Monday night. 
The evacuees in the Cholula shelter described how the waves of incandescence spraying across the night sky just a few miles away sent them scurrying for the evacuation buses which had been on standby since Friday. 
"We have nothing with us. Documents, a few clothes, but that's all," said Irma Sanchez, waiting in a lunch queue with her standard-issue plate and mug. "When you have to make a choice between your material possessions and protecting your life, you don't have to think very hard." 
This shelter holds about 700 of the approximately 35,000 people evacuated, mostly on Monday night or during the second eruptive episode, before dawn on Tuesday. While the majority went willingly, some refused to abandon all their possessions, although most of those who remained were persuaded to go when Popo erupted for several hours during Tuesday night. 
"I can't go. Who will feed my piglets?" Juana de la Cruz, 71, said as she trudged through the village of Santiago Xalitzintla. She believed that the volcano would never harm those who lived by its side, but promised to bail out if it started spitting red again, as it did three hours later. 
During the relative daytime calm on Tuesday, a twisted mass of vapour and ash stretched for miles into a bright blue sky, providing a dramatic backdrop to the now ghostlike villages below. 
With shutters down, the only signs of life were provided by the odd evacuee picking up essentials or feeding animals, dogs roaming in packs, and troops on standby to evacuate even the most reticent if a major eruption were forecast. 
The alert has captured Mexico's imagination, with millions glued to the live transmissions of eruptions on television. It has also provided President Vicente Fox with his first test of disaster-management in a country that, as well as being home to 14 active volcanoes, is plagued by floods, hurricanes and earthquakes. 
On a tour of the danger area, Mr Fox called for caution but promised everything was under control because "the volcanologists have all the information about what is going on in the intestines, the stomach, and the mind of the volcano. We just have to be prepared to react to what it tells us." No injuries have yet been reported. 
But if the correct prediction of the first eruption has forced locals to rethink their view of the experts as scaremongers playing with expensive useless toys, many still believe there is much more to the eruption than pressure build-ups. 
"Me and my mates have been talking, and although we aren't sure why he [the volcano] is acting this way, we think it might be that he's angry that we're cutting down the trees on his side," explained Adolfo, who recalls seeing the personification of the volcano, an old man called Don Goyo, in a forest on the mountain's flank six years ago. 
In an updated version of the traditional offerings taken to Popo's mystical shrines, Adolfo and his friends plan to rent a sound system and hold a dance to honour and placate Don Goyo as soon as it is safe to go home. 

*
'It was dangerous. That was the point' 

In 1993, volcanologist Stanley Williams led 16 people up a Colombian volcano. It erupted and nine of them died. Having survived with terrible injuries, Williams presented himself to the world as a plucky hero, but now he is being blamed for the tragedy. He tells James Meek why it was not his fault 

Monday June 4, 2001

Stanley Williams likes the taste of guinea pig. In the city of Pasto in south-western Colombia, where the dish is common, they grill a few of the animals on a single skewer and serve them sizzling hot, roughly chopped into several pieces. It's not the kind of fare you'd get at a restaurant in Williams' native Arizona. In America, in western Europe, guinea pigs are pets. Eating pets is wrong, right? Eating pets is weird. 
Even before the volcano Galeras, near Pasto, erupted while he was on it, smashing Williams' skull and vapourising some of his friends, the volcanologist was coming to the conclusion that it was his country, rather than the rest of the world, which was weird. Local scientists can't afford the equipment and training they need to monitor it as volcanoes in Europe, the US or Japan are monitored. 
On January 14 1993, Williams, professor of geology at Arizona state university, led a party of 16 people - 13 scientists and engineers, including himself, and three tourists - to the crater at the summit of the 9,000ft volcano. It was the highlight of a UN-sponsored conference in Pasto. Although they knew Galeras was the most active volcano in Colombia, and had erupted almost 30 times in 500 years, most recently in July 1992, they believed from the seismological and gas emission evidence they had that it was quiet. 
At about 1.40pm, just after Williams had asked the group to begin wrapping up for departure, rocks began to tumble off the wall of the crater, first singly, then in a cascade. Williams shouted: "Hurry up! Get out!" It was too late. The volcano shook, there was a sound like thunder, and the earth opened up. Gas pressure which had been building up for months was released and tons of rocks and ash poured into the air. Stones, some of them white hot and some the size of television sets, bombed down. 
Carlos Trujillo, a local engineer, died in a blast of intense heat which left nothing but a blackened, lacerated head and torso. A scientist from another part of Colombia, Nestor Garcia, together with the distinguished Russian volcanologist, Igor Menyailov, who were actually in the crater at the time of the eruption, were instantly turned to gas; no trace of them was ever found. Nor did anything remain of Geoff Brown, an expert in volcanoes from the Open University, or Fernando Cuenca, who had been close to Trujillo on the lip of the crater. Jose Arlez, another Pasto scientist, and the three tourists were burned and bombed to death by rocks flying with the velocity of bullets. 
Williams and three others, who were standing close to Arlez, were lucky not to bring the number of deaths from nine to 13. Williams came closest to sharing the fate of Arlez and the tourists: a rock the size of an orange smashed into his head, sending skull fragments deep into his brain. Another bombardment broke both his legs; his left leg had one bone sticking out of his trousers, his right foot remained attached only by tendons and strips of flesh. He was saved in a rescue led by two brave women colleagues, Marta Calvache and Patty Mothes, and by a young Colombian neurosurgeon who removed a piece of his brain the size of a peach stone. 
In the years since the eruption, Williams has become a celebrity. He has also acquired enemies. The bitterness about his personality, and about what happened on Galeras, has now broken out of the small circle of volcanology with the publication of two book versions of the events of 1993. One, Surviving Galeras, is Williams' own, written with Fen Montaigne; the other, No Apparent Danger, is written by a geology graduate and science writer, Victoria Bruce. 
Bruce's book accuses Williams of recklessly leading a party to the summit of Galeras, without safety helmets, protective suits or an emergency escape plan, in the face of evidence that the volcano was about to blow. They are harsh allegations, which Williams denies. He disputes the notion that a few screw-shaped blips on local seismographs represented warning enough that trouble was imminent. What he doesn't dispute is that active volcanoes are dangerous places - but he maintains that everyone in the group was well aware of that. The title of Bruce's book, he argues, doesn't make much sense. 
"Everybody who went there knew they were going to a dangerous volcano. That was the whole point," he says. 
"I was very careful to include some of the world's experts in volcanic earthquakes. In meetings we had we talked to each other, we had looked at the records, and in the days before the fatal eruption several different people had talked about the activity of Galeras to Colombian scientists who'd lived there for 25 years. Even if we'd been crazy and refused to listen to their warnings, would they have allowed their close friends to go into a ridiculously dangerous place on that day?" 
Hard hats could have saved lives and his head, Williams admits. He wears one on volcanoes now. But it is hard to see how an emergency plan would have helped. And Williams was in the company of two of the world's most eminent experts on volcanoes; Brown and Menyailov, who first went up a volcano in Kamchatka before he was even born, in the womb of his volcanologist mother. They are dead now, and cannot bear witness, but it is hard to take seriously Bruce's suggestion that these tough, experienced scientists were intimidated by Williams into going up Galeras. 
Williams sees the criticism of his actions, in part, as an attempt to project the fantasy values of America onto the real world, the world of actual hazard, the world where people eat guinea pigs instead of hamburgers and grow coca for cocaine instead of corn. America glorifies those who take risks in the abstract, and sues over risks in the particular. 
"People are obsessed with their liability," he says. "When I was 13 I lived in a part of the suburbs where they were building new houses and I worked as a helper. The builders liked me so they let me do more and more tasks, they let me take scraps of wood to build a fort, they let me drive their steamroller. None of that would be allowed now because they'd be terrified of legal liability. It's not an option for my son, Nicholas, who's 13 now. People are afraid. They think they learn about dangers but they don't learn quite enough to be realistic. 
"When I discovered volcanology was what I wanted to do I never even considered the danger. I was enthralled by watching with my own eyes the process of rocks being formed, watching nature do its thing. When prospective students approach me, curious about volcanoes, I never let them go anywhere near one until we've discussed the dangers. But I have to remind people that climbing a volcano is much less dangerous than driving in Colombia, whether you have an accident or you're held up at gunpoint." 
Williams accepts no guilt for the nine dead on Galeras. He does accept responsibility for his behaviour after the eruption, when for years he presented himself in the media - or, as he puts it, allowed the media to present him - as the sole survivor of the disaster. At least three others - Mike Conway, Andrew McFarlane and Luis Lamarie - were close to him when the crater blew, and were injured as they fled. He finds it hard to explain why he did that. Enough colleagues have gone public with their complaints about him - including allegations that he filched research, which he denies - to suggest that he was aggressive and abrasive in his dealings with fellow-scientists. In a mea culpa in the book, he admits his fame "fed my not inconsiderable ego." 
He played up the lone survivor image, he thinks, because the experience on the volcano that day changed him. The original Stanley Williams - a sharp scientist, not the best, but pretty good, and anxious to help secure the safety of the 500m people who live in danger range of volcanoes - didn't come back from Galeras. "I'm different," he says. "That guy died. I have to accept that." The post-eruption Williams is partially deaf, walks with some difficulty on extensively reconstructed legs, suffers from depression and unreasonable anger, mixes up words and is no longer up to scratch in the kind of higher abstract thinking scientists need. The first impression you have when you meet him is of anxiety and unease. 
"My guess is I'm still wrapped up in myself, because I'm still working on my health," says Williams. "Last week I went to see three different physicians. I take 20 pills a day. I think about myself too much." 
He has returned to Galeras since 1993, although only after another eruption aborted one planned trip. 
"In 1995, Galeras finally let me back inside its crater. I was in and out in two hours. I came down with pneumonia. Basically it was my not being strong enough to handle that effort. I shouldn't have done it. It wasn't an unbelievable, facing God kind of thing. I'm just not that sensitive, I guess. I wanted to go back there, I wanted to go back and stand on that spot, and think about Igor smiling, Geoff waving at me, me just explaining to the tourists what was going on. And a minute later everyone died. I don't have any sense of guilt for the deaths, but I miss them. It's a very sad thing." 

*
Threat of Etna eruption eases 

Graphic: Etna eruption 

Staff and agencies 
Tuesday July 24, 2001 

Ashes from Mount Etna continued to rain down on the Sicilian city of Catania today but the nearby airport was able to reopen after strong winds cleared the runway of ash and dust. 
However, ash from Europe's most active volcano still covered Cataniaês streets, where people had been using umbrellas the day before to protect themselves. 
The volcano continues to belch columns of gas, vapours and volcanic matter into the air but the lava flow has been steadily slowing. Emergency crews have managed to divert it by building earthworks. 
"There are very slight signals that the eruption activity is diminishing. I am cautiously optimistic," said Alberto Di Pace, prefect of Catania, a city at the base of the volcano. 
But experts say the volcano remains highly unpredictable, making it extremely difficult to tell whether the eruptions will stop soon. 
Police and firefighters have been deployed in towns on the slopes, but officials said they hoped they would not be needed. Since last week, the volcano has been at its most active for a decade. 
Closest to the flow is the village of Nicolosi, which is just two-and-a-half miles from the lava front. However, residents have taken some comfort in computer simulations showing that even if the unpredictable volcano became more active, lava flow should miss them. 
Scientists from the Catania Institute of Vulcanology and Geophysics said the two main arteries of lava have slowed down considerably since yesterday, when two new fractures appeared on the south side of the volcano. 
The new outlets reduced pressure on two rivers of lava advancing toward Nicolosi and Rifugio Sapienza, a tourist station high on the slopes. Ski lifts have already been damaged by the magma. 
Etna, which towers 3,310 metres above Sicily, springs to life every few months and its last major eruption was in 1992. 
The government yesterday declared a state of emergency for the Etna area as a precaution. The local tourism industry has been knocked and farmers have complained of damaged crops. 
In recent days, helicopters have doused the hot lava with water while the mountain has put on a mesmerising display, spewing out pyrotechnic lava, ash, smoke and rocks. 
On Sunday, the community organised a religious procession to pray that the flow be diverted or stopped. Legend has it that in 1886 the local archbishop managed to divert a wave of boiling magma descending on the village by brandishing before it a statue of Saint Anthony. 

*
Gone with the wind 

Unless agencies start planning now for the next eruption of Mount Nyiragongo, the millions spent on reconstruction will be wasted, warns Carmen Solana 

Thursday January 31, 2002
 
The astonishing images of the eruption of Mount Nyiragongo reinforce many people's feeling of helplessness before the powerful, capricious forces of nature. 
Latest estimates are that 245 people have been killed by the volcano since it started erupting on January 17. There could be more fatalities if disease hits the area. A quarter of a million people have been driven from their homes by the swift-moving lava flows. 
About 40% of Goma, the second city of the Democratic Republic of Congo and home to more than 400,000, has been destroyed. Many of the surviving buildings have been so shaken by earth tremors that they may have become unstable. 
The UN estimates the cost of providing food, blankets, household utensils, temporary shelter, clean water, sanitation and health care to the refugees at $15 million. The cost of rebuilding the town's infrastructure, homes and livelihoods is anybody's guess. 
The eruption appears to have caught aid agencies in Goma by surprise. But it was not a surprise to volcanologists and it should not have been a surprise to anybody living and working in the area. Mount Nyiragongo is one of Africa's most active volcanoes, and has been active since it was first described in 1894. Its summit holds a wide, deep crater that periodically fills up with lava, producing what is called a "lava lake". 
But Nyiragongo is best known for having produced the fastest lava flows recorded - 60kmh according to some estimates - in 1977, when the lava lake spilled out through a new crack in the side of the volcano. That lava flow covered 20 square km, engulfing 400 houses and a 10km stretch of road, and killed 70 people. 
In 1994, Nyiragongo was in the news again, when there were fears that that eruption, confined to the crater, could produce lava flows that would reach the camps for refugees escaping from the war and genocide in neighbouring Rwanda. 
How can the current eruption have been a surprise to people and aid workers in the area? And more worryingly, how prepared are they and their organisations to advise on development when they are not aware of the basic hazards? 
People are now returning to Goma and their thoughts are turning to how to rebuild the town. Aid agencies and international observers are worried that the area is not safe while the eruption continues, but will it ever be safe? 
Goma was spared by just a few kilometres in 1977 and this time the lava flows have split the town into three. Goma is likely to be affected again. 
Volcanoes do not go away. But we see "eruption blindness" almost everywhere there are volcanoes. Nyiragongo is not unique in this respect. Most volcanoes are forgotten as soon as they stop erupting: they look quiet and eruptions are perceived as a one-off event, as something you can't do anything about and you just have to learn to live with. 
The new hospital built with British development money on the Caribbean island of Montserrat, in a location known to be at risk from the Soufriere volcano, was closed within a few months of opening in 1996 by an eruption that went on to destroy it. San Sebastiano, a village in the foothills of Vesuvius, has been rebuilt three times in less than 100 years on top of the lava flows that destroy it. 
The city of Armero in Colombia was built on top of massive deposits from the Nevado del Ruiz volcano that had devastated the area more than once in historical times. Almost 30,000 people died when the volcano erupted in 1985. 
International aid agencies and the media are seriously concerned with what has happened in Goma. But experience shows that when the volcano quietens down, interest will wane, and the opportunity to learn and apply lessons will probably be lost. 
Aid agencies will point out that there are other pressing problems. For several years they have had to help people whose lives have been shattered by political instability and conflict. Behind this lie chronic poverty and underdevelopment. 
These everyday threats require immediate attention too, aid workers argue, and will continue to need it after the current crisis in Goma has gone away. 
Nyiragongo will erupt again- and soon: perhaps in a few years, maybe a decade. We do not know the size of the next eruption, exactly which part of the volcano the lava will come from and which areas will be affected, but we know it will happen. Aid agencies should start planning now. If they do not, the millions of dollars they are, and will be, spending on relief and reconstruction, will be money down the drain. 
· Dr Carmen Solana is a volcanologist at the Benfield Greig hazards research centre at University College London

*

A Guide to the End of the World: Everything You Never Wanted to Know by Bill McGuire 

A very short introduction to the Earth 

Monday March 25, 2002  
Danger: Nature at work 
We are so used to seeing on our television screens the battered remains of cities pounded by earthquakes or the thousands of terrified refugees escaping from yet another volcanic blast that they no longer hold any surprise or fear for us, insulated as we are by distance and a lack of true empathy. Although not entirely immune to disaster themselves, the great majority of citizens fortunate enough to live in prosperous Europe, North America, or Oceania view great natural catastrophes as ephemeral events that occur in strange lands far, far away. Mildly interesting but only rarely impinging upon a daily existence within which a murder in a popular soap opera or a win by the local football team holds far more interest than 50,000 dead in a Venezuelan mudslide. Remarkably, such an attitude even prevails in regions of developed countries that are also susceptible to volcanic eruptions and earthquakes. Talk to the citizens of Mammoth in California about the threat of their local volcano exploding into life, or to the inhabitants of Memphis, Tennessee, about prospects for their city being levelled by a major quake, and they are likely to shrug and point out that they have far more immediate things to worry about. The only explanation is that these people are in denial. They are quite aware that terrible disaster will strike at some point in the future - they just can't accept that it might happen to them or their descendants. 
When it comes to natural catastrophes on a global scale such an attitude is virtually omnipresent, pervading national governments, international agencies, multinational trading blocks, and much of the scientific community. There is some cause for optimism, however, and in one area, at least, this has begun to change. The threat to the Earth from asteroid and comet impacts is now common knowledge and the race is on to identify all those Earth-approaching asteroids that have the potential to stop the development of our race in its tracks. Thanks to recent widely publicised television documentaries shown in the UK and United States, the added threats of volcanic super-eruptions and giant tsunamis have now also begun to reach an audience wider than the tight groups of scientists that work on these rather esoteric phenomena. 
In fact, the Earth is an extraordinarily fragile place that is fraught with danger: a tiny rock hurtling through space, wracked by violent movements of its crust and subject to dramatic climatic changes as its geophysical and orbital circumstances vary. Barely 10,000 years after the end of the Ice Age, the planet is sweltering in some of the highest temperatures in recent Earth history. At the same time, over-population and exploitation are dramatically increasing the vulnerability of modern society to natural catastrophes such as earthquakes, floods, and volcanic eruptions. In this introductory chapter, current threats to the planet and its people are examined as a prelude to consideration of the bigger threats to come. 
The Earth is the most dynamic planet in our solar system, and it is this dynamism that has given us our protective magnetic field, our atmosphere, our oceans, and ultimately our lives. The very same geophysical features that make the Earth so life-giving and preserving also, however, make it dangerous. For example, the spectacular volcanoes that in the early history of our planet helped to generate the atmosphere and the oceans have in the last three centuries wiped out a quarter of a million people and injured countless others. At the same time, the rains that feed our rivers and provide us with the potable water that we need to survive have devastated huge tracts of the planet with floods that in recent years have been truly biblical in scale. In any single year since 1990 perhaps 20,000 were killed and tens of millions affected by raging floodwaters, and in 1998 major river floods in China and Bangladesh led to misery for literally hundreds of millions of their inhabitants. I could go on in the same vein, describing how lives made enjoyable by a fresh fall of snow are swiftly ended when it avalanches, or how a fresh breeze that sets sailing dinghies skimming across the wave tops can soon transform itself into a wailing banshee of terrible destruction - but I think you get the picture. Nature provides us with all our needs but we must be very wary of its rapidly changing moods. 
The Earth: a potted biography 
The major global geophysical catastrophes that await us down the line are in fact just run-of-the-mill natural phenomena writ large. In order to understand them, therefore, it is essential to know a little about the Earth and how it functions. Here, I will sashay through the 4.6 billion years of Earth history, elucidating along the way those features that make our world so hazardous and our future upon it so precarious. To begin, it is sometimes worth pondering upon just how incredibly old the Earth is, if only to appreciate the notion that just because we have not experienced a particular natural catastrophe before does not mean it has never happened, nor that it will not happen again. 
The Earth has been around just about long enough to ensure that anything nature can conjure up it already has. To give a true impression of the great age of our planet compared to that of our race, perhaps I can fall back on an analogy I have used before. Imagine the entirety of Earth's history represented by a team of runners tackling the three and a half laps of the 1,500 metres. For the first lap our planet would be a barren wasteland of impacting asteroids and exploding volcanoes. During the next the planet would begin to cool, allowing the oceans to develop and the simplest life forms to appear. The geological period known as the Cambrian, which marked the real explosion of diverse life forms, would not begin until well after the bell has rung and the athletes are hurtling down the final straight of the last lap. As they battle for the tape, dinosaurs appear and then disappear while the leaders are only 25 metres from the finish. Where are we? Well, our most distant ancestors only make an appearance in the last split-second of the race, just as the exhausted winner breasts the tape. 
Since the first single-celled organisms made their appearance billions of years ago, within sweltering chemical soups brooded over by a noxious atmosphere, life has struggled precariously to survive and evolve against a background of potentially lethal geophysical phenomena. Little has changed today, except perhaps the frequency of global catastrophes, and many on the planet still face a daily threat to life, limb, and livelihood from volcano, quake, flood, and storm. The natural perils that have battered our race in the past, and which constitute a growing future threat, have roots that extend back over 4 billion years to the creation of the solar system and the formation of the Earth from a disc of debris orbiting a primordial Sun. Like our sister planets, the Earth can be viewed as a lottery jackpot winner; one of only nine chunks of space debris out of original trillions that managed to grow and endure while the rest annihilated one another in spectacular collisions or were swept up by the larger lucky few with their stronger and more influential gravity fields. This sweeping-up process - known as accretion - involved the Earth and other planets adding to their masses through collisions with other smaller chunks of rock, an extremely violent process that was mostly completed - fortunately for us - almost 4 billion years ago. 
After this time, the solar system was a much less cluttered place, with considerably less debris hurtling about and impacts on the planets less ubiquitous events. Nevertheless, major collisions between the Earth and asteroids and comets - respectively rocky and icy bodies that survived the enthusiastic spring cleaning during the early history of the solar system - are recognized throughout our planet's geological record. As I will discuss in Chapter 5, such collisions have been held responsible for a number of mass extinctions over the past half a billion years, including that which saw off the dinosaurs. Furthermore, the threat of asteroid and comet impacts is still very much with us, and over 300 Potentially Hazardous Asteroids (or PHAs) have already been identified that may come too close for comfort. 
The primordial Earth would have borne considerably more resemblance to our worst vision of hell than today's stunning blue planet. The enormous heat generated by collisions, together with that produced by high concentrations of radioactive elements within the Earth, would have ensured that the entire surface was covered with a churning magma ocean, perhaps 400 kilometres deep. Temperatures at this time would have been comparable with some of the cooler stars, perhaps approaching 5,000 degrees Celsius. Inevitably, where molten rock met the bitter cold of space, heat was lost rapidly, allowing the outermost levels of the magma ocean to solidify to a thin crust. Although the continuously churning currents in the molten region immediately below repeatedly caused this to break into fragments and slide once again into the maelstrom, by about 2.7 billion years ago more stable and long-lived crust managed to develop and to thicken grad- ually. Convection currents continued to stir in the hot and partially molten rock below, carrying out the essential busi- ness of transferring the heat from radioactive sources in the planet's deep interior into the growing rigid outer shell from where it was radiated into space. The disruptive action of these currents ensured that the Earth's rigid outer layer was never a single, unbroken carapace, but instead comprised separate rocky plates that moved relative to one another on the backs of the sluggish convection currents. 
As a crust was forming, major changes were also occurring deep within the Earth's interior. Here, heavier elements - mainly iron and nickel - were slowly sinking under gravity towards the centre to form the planet's metallic core. At its heart, a ball made up largely of solid iron and nickel formed, but pressure and temperature conditions in the outer core were such that this remained molten. Being a liquid, this also rotated in sympathy with the Earth's rotation, in the process generating a magnetic field that protects life on the surface by blocking damaging radiation from space and provides us with a reliable means of navigation without which our pioneering ancestors would have found exploration - and returning home again - a much trickier business. 
For the last couple of billion years or so, things have quietened down considerably on the planet, and its structure and the geophysical processes that operate both within and at the surface have not changed a great deal. Internally, the Earth has a threefold structure. A crust made up of low-density, mainly silicate, minerals incorporated into rocks formed by volcanic action, sedimentation, and burial; a partly molten mantle consisting of higher-density minerals, also silicates, and a composite core of iron and nickel with some impurities. Ultimately, the hazards that constantly impinge upon our society result from our planet's need to rid itself of the heat that is constantly generated in the interior by the decay of radioactive elements. As in the Earth's early history, this is carried towards the surface by convection currents within the mantle. These currents in turn constitute the engines that drive the great, rocky plates across the surface of the planet, and underpin the concept of plate tectonics, which geophysicists use to provide a framework for how the Earth operates geologically. 
The relative movements of the plates themselves, which comprise the crust and the uppermost rigid part of the mantle (together known as the lithosphere), are in turn directly related to the principal geological hazards - earthquakes and volcanoes, which are concentrated primarily along plate margins. Here a number of interactions are possible. Two plates may scrape jerkily past one another, accumulating strain and releasing it periodically through destructive earthquakes. Examples of such conservative plate margins include the quake-prone San Andreas Fault that separates western California from the rest of the United States and Turkey's North Anatolian Fault, whose latest movement triggered a major earthquake in 1999. Alternatively, two plates may collide head on. If they both carry continents built from low-density granite rock, as with the Indian Ocean and Eurasian plates, then the result of collision is the growth of a high mountain range - in this case the Himalayas - and at the same time the generation of major quakes such as that which obliterated the Indian city of Bhuj in January 2001. 
On the other hand, if an oceanic plate made of dense basalt hits a low-density continental plate then the former will plunge underneath, pushing back into the hot, convecting mantle. As one plate thrusts itself beneath the other (a process known as subduction) so large earthquakes are generated. Subduction is going on all around the Pacific Rim, ensuring high levels of seismic activity in Alaska, Japan, Taiwan, the Philippines, Chile, and elsewhere in the circum-Pacific region. This type of destructive plate margin - so called because one of the two colliding plates is destroyed - also hosts large numbers of active volcanoes. Although the mechanics of magma formation in such regions is sometimes complex, it is ultimately a result of the subduction process and owes much to the partial melting of the subducting plate as it is pushed down into ever hotter levels in the mantle. Fresh magma formed in this way rises as a result of its low density relative to the surrounding rocks, and blasts its way through the surface at volcanoes that are typically explosive and particularly hazardous. Strings of literally hundreds of active and dormant volcanoes circle the Pacific, making up the legendary Ring of Fire, while others sit above subduction zones in the Caribbean and Indonesia. Virtually all large, lethal eruptions occur in these areas, and recent volcanic disasters have occurred at Pinatubo (Philippines) in 1991, Rabaul (Papua New Guinea) in 1994, and Montserrat (Lesser Antilles, Caribbean) from 1995 until the time of writing. 
To compensate for the consumption of some plate material, new rock must be created to take its place. This happens at so-called constructive plate margins, along which fresh magma rises from the mantle, solidifies, and pushes the plates on either side apart. This occurs beneath the oceans along a 40,000-kilometre long network of linear topographic highs known as the Mid-Ocean Ridge system, where newly created lithosphere exactly balances that which is lost back into the mantle at destructive margins. A major part of the Mid- Ocean Ridge system runs down the middle of the Atlantic Ocean, bisecting Iceland, and separating the Eurasian and African plates in the east from the North and South American plates in the west. Here too there are both volcanoes and earthquakes, but the former tend to involve relatively mild eruptions and the latter are small. Driven by the mantle convection currents beneath, the plates waltz endlessly across the surface of the Earth, at about the same rate as fingernails grow, constantly modifying the appearance of our planet and ensuring that, given time, everywhere gets its fair share of earthquakes and volcanic eruptions. 
Hazardous Earth 
While earthquakes and volcanic eruptions are linked to how our planet functions geologically, other geophysical hazards are more dependent upon processes that operate in the Earth's atmosphere. Rather than the heat from the interior, our planet's weather machine is driven by energy from the Sun. Our nearest star is the ultimate instigator - aided by the Earth's rotation and the constant exchange of energy and water with the oceans - of the tropical cyclones and floods that exact an enormous toll on life and property, particularly in developing countries. Still other lethal natural phenomena have a composite origin and are less easy to pigeonhole. The giant sea waves known as tsunamis (or sometimes incorrectly as 'tidal waves'), for example, can be formed in a number of different ways; most commonly by submarine earthquakes, but also by landslides into the ocean and by eruptions of coastal and island volcanoes. Similarly, many landslides result from a collusion between geology and meteorology, with torrential rainfall destabilizing already weak slopes. Although there remains an enormous amount to learn about natural hazards, their causes and characteristics, our current level of knowledge is truly encyclopedic - and if so desired you can indeed consult weighty and authoritative tomes focused entirely on specific hazards. Here, as a taster, my intention is to gallop you through the principal features of the major natural hazards at a pace which I hope is not too great, before placing their current and future impact on our society in some perspective. 
At any single point and at any one time the Earth and its enclosing atmospheric envelope give the impression of being mundanely stable and benign. This is, however, an entirely misleading notion, with something like 1,400 earthquakes rocking the planet every day and a volcano erupting every week. Each year, the tropics are battered by up to 40 hurricanes, typhoons, and cyclones, while floods and landslides occur everywhere in numbers too great to keep track of. In terms of the number of people affected - at least 100 million people a year - floods undoubtedly constitute the greatest of all natural hazards, a situation that is likely to continue given a future of rising sea levels and more extreme precipitation. River floods are respecters of neither wealth nor status, and both developed and developing countries have been severely afflicted in recent years, across every continent. Wherever rain is unusually torrential or persistent, it will not be long before river catchments fail to contain surface run-off and start to expand across their flood plains and beyond. In fact, the intensity of rainfall can be quite astonishing, with, in 1970, nearly 4 centimetres of rain falling in just 60 seconds on the French Caribbean island of Guadeloupe - a world record. On another French island, Réunion, in the Indian Ocean, a passing cyclone dropped close to 4 metres of rain during a single 24-hour period in March 1952. As flood plains all over the world become more crowded, the loss of life and damage to property caused by swollen rivers has increased dramatically. In the spring of 1993, the Mississippi and Missouri rivers burst their banks, inundating nine Midwest states, destroying 50,000 homes and leaving damage totalling 20 billion US$. Massive floods occurred in many parts of the UK in autumn 2000 as rain fell with a ferocity not seen for over 300 years. River flooding continues to pose a major threat in China, and has been responsible for over 5 million deaths over the last 150 years. Bangladesh has it even worse, with the country often finding two-thirds of its land area under water as a result either of floodwaters pouring down the great Ganges river system or of cyclone-related storm surges pouring inland from the Bay of Bengal. Coastal flooding due to storms probably takes more lives than any other natural hazard, with an estimated 300,000 losing their lives in Bangladesh in 1970 and 15,000 at Orissa, northeast India, in 1999. 
Partly through their effectiveness at spawning floods, but also through the enormous wind speeds achieved, storms constitute one of the most destructive of all natural hazards. Furthermore, because they are particularly common in some of the world's most affluent regions, they are responsible for some of the most costly natural disasters of all time. Every year, the Caribbean, the Gulf and southern states of the USA, and Japan are struck by tropical storms, while the UK and continental Europe suffer increasingly from severe and damaging winter storms. In 1992, Hurricane Andrew virtually obliterated southern Miami in one of the costliest natural disasters in US history, resulting in losses of 32 billion US$. This epic storm brought to bear on the city wind speeds of up to 300 kilometres per second, leaving 300,000 buildings damaged or destroyed and 150,000 homeless. Destructive windstorms are not only confined to the tropics, and hurricane-force winds also accompany low-pressure weather systems at mid-latitudes. 
Many residents of southern England will remember the Great Storm of October 1987 that felled millions of trees with winds whose average speeds were clocked at just below hurricane force. More recently, in 1999, France suffered a similar ordeal as winter storm Lothar blasted its way across the north of the country. Across the ocean, the US Midwest braces itself every year for a savage onslaught from tornadoes: rotating maelstroms of solid wind that form during thunderstorms in the contact zone between cold, dry air from the north and warm, moist air from the tropics. No man-made structures that suffer a direct hit can withstand the average wind speeds of up to 500 kilometres an hour, and damage along a tornado track is usually total. Although rarely as lethal as hurricanes, in just a few days in April 1974 almost 150 tornadoes claimed over 300 lives in Kentucky, Tennessee, Alabama, and adjacent states. 
Of the so-called geological hazards - earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, and landslides - there is no question that earthquakes are by far the most devastating. Every year about 3,000 quakes reach magnitude 6 on the well-known Richter Scale, which is large enough to cause significant damage and loss of life, particularly when they strike poorly constructed and ill-prepared population centres in developing countries. As previously mentioned, most large earthquakes are confined to distinct zones that coincide with the margins of plates. In recent years, sudden movements of California's San Andreas Fault have generated large earthquakes in San Francisco (1989) and southern California (1994), the latter causing damage totalling 35 billion US$ - the costliest natural disaster in US history. Just a year later, a magnitude 7.2 quake at the western margin of the Pacific plate devastated the Japanese city of Kobe, killing 6,000 and engendering economic losses totalling a staggering 200 billion US$ - the most expensive natural disaster of all time. Four years after Kobe, the North Anatolian Fault slipped just to the east of Istanbul, generating a severe quake that flattened the town of Izmit and neighbouring settlements and took over 17,000 lives. 
Large earthquakes can also occur, however, at locations remote from plate margins, and have been known in northern Europe and the eastern USA, which are not regions of high seismic risk. The last such intraplate quake devastated the Bhuj region of India's Gujarat state in January 2001, completely destroying 400,000 buildings and killing perhaps as many as 100,000 people. There is a truism uttered by earthquake engineers: it is buildings not earthquakes that kill people. Without question this is the case, and both damage to property and loss of life could be drastically reduced if appropriate building codes were both applied and enforced. Earthquakes, however, also prove lethal through the triggering of landslides as a result of ground shaking, and by the formation of tsunamis. The latter are generated when a quake instantaneously jerks upwards - perhaps by just a metre or so - a large area of the seabed, causing the displaced water above to hurtle outwards as a series of waves. When these enter shallow water they build in height - sometimes to 20 metres or more - and crash into coastal zones with extreme force. In 1998, Sissano and neighbouring villages on the north coast of Papua New Guinea were wiped out and 3,000 of their inhabitants drowned or battered to death by a 17-metre-high tsunamis that struck within minutes of an offshore earthquake. 
Estimates of the number of active volcanoes vary, but there are at least 1,500 and possibly over 3,000. Every year around 50 volcanoes erupt, some of which - like Kilauea on Hawaii or Stromboli in Italy - are almost constantly active. Others, however, may have been quiet for centuries or in some cases millennia and these tend to be the most destructive. The most violent volcanoes occur at destructive plate margins, where one plate is consuming another. Their outbursts rarely produce quiet flows of red lava and are more likely to blast enormous columns of ash and debris 20 kilometres or more into the atmosphere. Carried by the wind over huge areas, volcanic ash can be extremely disruptive, making travel difficult, damaging crops, poisoning livestock, and contaminating water supplies. Just 30 centimetres or so of wet ash is sufficient to cause roofs to collapse while the fine component of dry ash can cause respiratory problems and illnesses such as silicosis. 
Close to an erupting volcano the depth of accumulated ash can total several metres, sufficient to bury single-storey structures. This was the fate of much of the town of Rabaul on the island of New Britain (Papua New Guinea), during the 1994 eruptions of its twin volcanoes Vulcan and Tavurvur. For years following the 1991 eruption of Pinatubo in the Philippines, thick deposits of volcanic debris provided a source for mudflows whenever a tropical cyclone passed overhead and dumped its load of rain. Almost a decade later, mud pouring off the volcano was still clogging rivers, inundating towns and agricultural land, and damaging fisheries and coral reefs. Somewhat surprisingly, mudflows also constitute one of the biggest killers at active volcanoes. In 1985 a small eruption through the ice and snow fields of Columbia's Nevado del Ruiz volcano unleashed a torrent of mud out of all proportion to the size of the eruption, which poured down the valleys draining the volcano and buried the town of Armero and 23,000 of its inhabitants. 
Even scarier and more destructive than volcanic mudflows are pyroclastic flows or glowing avalanches. These hurricane-force blasts of incandescent gas, molten lava fragments, and blocks and boulders sometimes as large as houses have the power to obliterate everything in their paths. In 1902, in the worst volcanic disaster of the twentieth century, pyroclastic flows from the Mont Pelée volcano on the Caribbean island of Martinique annihilated the town of St Pierre as effectively as a nuclear bomb, within a few minutes leaving only two survivors out of a population of 29,000. The threat from volcanoes does not end there: chunks of rock collapsing from their flanks can trigger huge tsunamis, while noxious fumes can and have locally killed thousands and their livestock. Volcanic gases carried into the stratosphere, and from there around the planet, have modified the climate and led to miserable weather, crop failures, and health problems half a world away. On the grandest scale, volcanic super-eruptions have the potential to affect us all, through plunging the planet into a frigid volcanic winter and devastating harvests worldwide. 

*
Warning from the dead 

Bill McGuire on the lessons learned a century after the volcanic carnage in the Caribbean 

Thursday May 2, 2002
 
One hundred years ago this month, the worst volcanic catastrophe of the 20th century wrought carnage on the Caribbean island of Martinique. Wedged between the sparkling Caribbean sea and the towering Mont Pelée volcano, the town and port of Saint Pierre - the "Paris of the West Indies" - bathed in sunshine. 
Just before 8am on May 8, 1902, the cathedral bells rang out, calling the faithful to the Ascension Day service. It was the last time they would be heard. Minutes later, the bustling community ceased to exist - transformed into hell incarnate by one of the most devastating volcanic blasts of the century. Grainy monochrome pictures of the aftermath reveal scenes of ruin rarely seen outside the post-apocalyptic images of the Japanese cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. 
The terse message transmitted at 8.03am by the wireless operator on the telegraph cable ship Pouyer-Quertier anchored offshore - "St Pierre destroyed by Pelée eruption. Send all assistance" - does not begin to do justice to the scale of destruction. In barely two minutes, virtually every building had been flattened and around 29,000 inhabitants roasted alive or asphyxiated by burning gases. 
Saint Pierre's nemesis was a volcanic phenomenon known to volcanologists as a pyroclastic flow, and to observers in the French Caribbean as a nuée ardente , or glowing avalanche. These hurricane blasts of super-heated volcanic gases, glowing ash and blocks as big as houses are the most terrifying of all volcanic hazards. 
Pyroclastic flows, in which the magma is particularly sticky and gas rich, have taken more than 50,000 lives during the past 300 years. The same phenomenon was responsible for the obliteration of the Roman towns of Pompeii and Herculaneum during the AD79 eruption of Vesuvius. This is particularly ironic in the light of a statement issued by the local newspaper, Les Colonies, designed to calm the worried inhabitants of Saint Pierre. It read: "Mont Pelée is no more to be feared by St Pierre than Vesuvius is feared by Naples. Where could one be better off than Saint Pierre?" In retrospect the answer is clear - anywhere else on the planet. 
The newspaper statement typifies the attitude of the island's establishment and highlights the paramount reason for the catastrophe - the poor response of the authorities to a crisis that had been escalating for months. Not only was the threat constantly played down, but the impression was given that it would be safer if inhabitants of outlying settlements moved into Saint Pierre. Consequently, at the time of the blast, the town's population had swelled more than 10%. 
Inevitably, politics also played a part. Elections were imminent and the new governor, Louis Mouttet, was determined they should go ahead. Although supposedly apolitical, Mouttet was a covert supporter of the reactionary Progressive Party, which advocated traditional French colonial policy and the maintenance of the status quo. With the opposition Radical Party, supported by the negro and mulatto population, becoming stronger by the day, Governor Mouttet avoided any moves that would engender panic and cause the progressives to haemorrhage further support. 
The press, also a supporter of the Progressive Party, followed suit, chastising those who drew attention to the growing threat from Pelée, and playing up the conclusion of the governor's commission of inquiry, which concluded "that the safety of Saint Pierre was absolutely assured". 
As activity escalated and the crisis deepened, the locals became less convinced. Fear increased as rivers of boiling mud poured into outlying settlements and sugar mills, killing hundreds, and turned to terror following invasions of stinging ants and deadly snakes fleeing the volcano. Some tried to leave town, only to find their way barred by armed troops. With the election just days away, Governor Mouttet had resolved not to lose a single voter. So when Pelée could no longer contain herself, Saint Pierre was bursting at the seams with terrified inhabitants. 
Are we any better prepared, 100 years on, to cope with a major volcanic eruption? We know a lot more about volcanic hazards and, in particular, the deadly pyroclastic flows that were the scourge of Saint Pierre, and we are better at forecasting volcanic eruptions. No volcano explodes without some warning sign - usually increased numbers of earth tremors or a swelling of the ground surface. 
This increased knowledge was, however, of little help to the inhabitants of the Colombian town of Armero, 23,000 of whom died in the 1985 eruption of the Nevado del Ruiz volcano, the second worst volcanic catastrophe of the century. Despite warnings from scientists, and ignoring the fact that the town was built on deposits of volcanic debris, the authorities did nothing, committing the inhabitants to death by incarceration in a muddy tomb. 
And this highlights the nub of the problem. We know much more about the science of volcanoes, but we have a way to go in learning how to communicate the threat to local people and the civil authorities. With only around 150 of the world's 3,000 active and potentially active volcanoes monitored, further disasters on a scale of Saint Pierre are inevitable. 
Unless, that is, we can focus as much on the message as on the science. Volcanologists must become good communicators if they are to make their warnings heard above the voices of local politics and vested interest. With more and more people living in danger zones around the world's volcanoes, failure to do so will ensure that volcanic destruction in this century will dwarf that of the last. 
· Bill McGuire is Benfield Greig Professor of Geophysical Hazards and director of the Benfield Greig Hazard Research Centre at University College London. His new book, A Guide to the End of the World: Everything You Never Wanted to Know, is published by Oxford University Press, £11.99.

*
Volcano chief quits stricken island 

Polly Pattullo
Saturday July 1, 2000
 
The British director of the Montserrat volcano observatory has resigned, adding to Britain's difficulties in handling the Caribbean island's protracted crisis. 
Simon Young has refused a new contract because his recently born daughter is barred for health reasons from living on the island, partly devastated by the active Soufriere Hills volcano.
Since Zoe was born three months ago he has commuted by helicopter from the nearby island of Antigua.
He told Radio Montserrat that he had been unable to reach agreement on a new contract with the British Geological Survey, which takes over the management of the observatory from the Department for International Development (DfID) today.
"They will not allow my baby to even spend one evening on Montserrat, because they believe that the volcanic ash may pose some long-term threat to her health," he said.
He was "very disappointed" to be leaving, especially since the volcano was expected to become more active.
The 5,000 or so Montserratians who remain on the island live in the safe north; two thirds of the island remains an "exclusion zone", including the capital, Plymouth, which has been virtually destroyed by volcanic activity.
A spokesman for the DfID, which funds the observatory, said the rule that expatriates' children under the age of 12 must not live on the island was introduced in late 1997, at the height of the crisis, because there was no paediatrician on the island, and no facilities for night flying.
In March the island's chief medical officer, Dr Colin Avery, suggested to the DfID that it might be advisable to seek a second opinion about the ban.
"If expatriate babies and children under 12 are not allowed on island," he wrote in a letter leaked to the Montserrat Reporter in April, "why are we not advising the government of Montserrat to evacuate all children under 12 years?"
A mission due to visit the island in August will reassess standards of health care, especially paediatric provision. The heliport is being improved, but the work does not seem to have any priority.
David Ovadia, head of British Geological Survey International, denied that the observatory would not be fully staffed.

*
Hundreds perish in Nicaraguan mudslide 

By Filadelfo Aleman in Managua and Phil Gunson
Monday November 2, 1998 

Emergency workers in Nicaragua recovered hundreds of bodies yesterday from communities buried when a lake in a volcano crater overflowed and caused part of the mountain to crumble, sending tons of mud and rock down on villages below. 
The flooding was caused by Hurricane Mitch and the discovery of the bodies raised the death toll from the hurricane to 978.
Authorities feared many more bodies would be found in 10 communities at the foot of the Casitas Volcano in north-western Nicaragua.
The first army rescue helicopters to reach the volcano yesterday found widespread destruction, Captain Milton Sandoval said. Rescue workers recovered 360 bodies in four villages near Posoltega, about 50 miles north-west of Managua. The mudslide happened Friday.
Only 92 of the estimated area's 2,000 residents were found alive. Some were injured and the rest were listed as missing, Capt Sandoval said.
Soldiers working at the scene were burying the decomposing bodies of the victims where they lay because of public health concerns, he said.
It was unclear whether any residents of the villages of El Porvenir, Versalles, Rolando Rodriguez and Santa Narcisa had fled in time to avoid the mudslide or all were asleep when it struck.
Unconfirmed radio reports said as many as 4,000 people may have died, though the authorities said they believed that was too high. The Nicaraguan Red Cross said about 1,900 people were missing.
Felicitas Zeledon, mayor of Posoltega, the nearest town, described the area as looking like a desert strewn with corpses.
Honduras was also hit when Mitch, the fourth most powerful storm in Central America this century, entered its waters a week ago as a category five hurricane - highest level on the scale. The mayor of the capital, Tegucigalpa, was among four people killed yesterday when his helicopter crashed. Cesar Castellanos had spent the day overseeing recovery efforts after the hurricane caused massive flooding, destroyed houses and bridges and left thousands of people homeless.
Also killed in the crash were two crew members and the mayor's official cameraman, local television reported.
By yesterday, seven of the city's 10 bridges over the rivers Choluteca and Chiquito were reported down and Tegucigalpa was described as "partially destroyed".
Gabriela Nunez, finance minister, said after surveying the damage: "The world must help put us back on our feet."
Official figures listed nine people killed in the capital but the death toll could be in the hundreds as waters recede and bodies are found.
La Ceiba, one of the country's main ports, was cut off after bridges gave way and flooding at the international airport at San Pedro Sula left damage estimated at millions of dollars.
Off the coast, some small communities were wiped from the map in the Bay Islands.
Not a tree was left standing on the island of Guanaja, once known as the "isle of pines". Wooden houses were reduced to matchwood. A yacht with 31 on board, including two Britons, was missing. Most of the damage was done by the unprecedented rainfall before Mitch gradually weakened though Saturday.
Filadelfo Aleman is an Associated Press reporter

*
Weatherwatch: Under the shadow of the volcano 

By Paul Simons
Monday January 4, 1999


Volcanoes are great pieces of drama, with their noise, sparks, lava and smoke. But what gets meteorologists excited is the way volcanoes can do grievous bodily harm to the atmosphere when they really explode. Mind you, it's only a few volcanoes with the power to duff up the weather. 
Mount Pinatubo in the Philippines in 1991 was the last big eruption with a meteorological kick. It shot out the largest amount of dust and acid droplets into the stratosphere this century, cutting out so much of the Sun's warmth that it shaved about half a degree off global temperatures for a year or two - and incidentally made a nasty dent in the ozone layer.
But Pinatubo was a pinprick compared to other volcanic eruptions dating back centuries or millennia ago. In 1815, Tambora in Indonesia was reckoned to have fired off five times more dust than Pinatubo and sent world temperatures into a tailspin - making the year after 'the year without summer' when there were June frosts in New England and the French wine harvest was the worst for five centuries. And Tambora was a pipsqueak compared to Toba in Sumatra 73,500 years ago which is reckoned to have turned the world freezing for decades and maybe centuries afterwards, perhaps enough to hasten the onset of the last ice age.
But even Toba was a piffling spot on the climate record compared to an entirely different sort of volcanic activity. Every now and again the Earth's mantle splits open and spills out vast lakes of lava. They are called basalt flows and there is a strong suspicion they caused the extinction of the dinosaurs. Thanks to new techniques for dating rocks, it is now possible to pinpoint a colossal basalt flow 65 million years ago which covered a third of the Indian sub-continent. This mind-boggling disaster sent the world's climate blowing cold and then hot. It released a vast cloud of sulphur dioxide which cooled the Earth, followed by carbon dioxide which triggered a greenhouse effect and sent world temperatures rocketing.
The dinosaurs might well have coped with these violent swings in climate but the vegetation could not. Plant life was massacred, and so the herbivores died out and with them the meat-eaters. The food chains ground to a halt.
But what about the theory that the dinosaurs were killed off by an asteroid? The story goes that the asteroid smashed into the Yucatan coast in Mexico and shot up so much dust and vapour that it sent world temperatures crashing and the dinosaurs got hammered. It is this apocalypse which has sent some scientists reaching for their telescopes to watch out for any future asteroid winging our way.
So what do the lava enthusiasts feel about that theory? Yes, they say, there was a massive asteroid impact, but world temperatures were already going haywire and the dinosaurs going extinct well before the asteroid.
Of course, a load of lava oozing out of cracks is not nearly as sexy as a giant asteroid crashing into the Earth. But the lava loyalists have another ace card up their sleeve. They say that almost every basalt flow can explain all the mass extinctions in Earth's history. The worst basalt flow of all struck 250 million years ago in Siberia and coincides with the time when 95 per cent of the world's species went to the wall.
Looked at from a biologist's point of view, lava has changed the course of evolution. Each mass extinction wipes life almost clean off the Earth, but afterwards the numbers of plant and animal species explodes and evolution goes into overdrive. It is not so much natural selection as lucky selection - the species which survived inherited the Earth afterwards. Thanks to that lava flow 65 million years ago the mammals took over .

*
Up in smoke 

70,000 take refuge as Philippine volcano threatens more eruptions 

Monday March 6, 2000


US and Filipino soldiers began building tent cities yesterday to help ease overcrowding among nearly 70,000 people evacuated from villages near the Mayon volcano in the Philippines. 
The volcano, 190 miles southeast of Manila on the island of Luzon, remained dormant after a week of eruptions which spewed lava and super-heated ash over a wide area. 
Some of the refugees who fled from their homes on Mayon's slopes are housed in school buildings about six miles from the volcano. Others are staying in shelters made of iron sheets which turn into virtual ovens during hot weather. 
Two military transport planes flew into the provincial capital, Legazpi, carrying the US troops, tents, building materials and 20,000 masks to protect refugees with respiratory illnesses from ash falls. 
Despite the lull, scientists continue to record dozens of small quakes every day and Mayon's slopes remain swollen from the pressure of rising magma, indicating that the threat is not over. 
Mayon's last major eruption, in 1993, killed 77 villagers. 
Reuters, Legazpi 

*
Experts predict huge eruption at Mount Usu 


Volcanic activity reports 

Jonathan Watts in Tokyo
Thursday April 6, 2000


Japanese authorities issued masks, goggles and helmets to residents near the rumbling Mount Usu volcano yesterday amid growing fears of landslides and another eruption more devastating than anything seen so far. 
Craters on Mt Usu on the northern island of Hokkaido have been belching huge plumes of smoke since the eruption on Friday, the first in 22 years, but scientists warned that the real fireworks may be yet to come. 
Huge cracks have appeared around the base of the 2,400ft mountain, swallowing houses and damaging buildings, as magma pushes close to the earth's surface. 
Professor Hiromu Okada from Hokkaido University said this indicated the rapid formation of a new lava dome, which was likely to rise up with explosive force in the next one or two weeks to form a new mountain. 
Unlike the weekend eruptions, this could create the most dangerous of volcanic phenomena: a flow of superheated ash, gas and molten rock. 
"I am more scared of the new cracks that have been discovered over the past few days," an official at the meteorological agency said. "It is possible that an explosion, blowing off the whole area, could occur." 
In the nearby town of Sobetsu, town officials began distributing goggles and masks to protect residents against clouds of ash, the longest of which stretched more than 12 miles from the mountain. 
Schoolchildren were given helmets to protect them from the flying rocks that are likely to fly through the air if the mountain blows again. NHK news said it had found a huge boulder that flew hundreds of meters at the weekend. 
Yesterday huge mudslides, a mixture of volcanic ash and rock, began flowing down the mountain slopes towards the hot spring resort of Akira Miura. 
Officials warned that the 1.6 inches of rain expected overnight could further dislodge the loose volcanic ash, rock and debris that has accumulated on the mountain's slopes over the past few days. 
By early evening, television footage taken from helicopters showed huge streams flowing down the smoking sides of Mt Usu into channels built after the last eruption in 1978. 
Although the towns at the foot of the mountain are now deserted, evacuees feared that the channels would burst and their homes would be ruined. 
More than 15,000 people have been evacuated from a 16,000 acre zone around Mt Usu since the volcano showed signs of activity last week. 
Thousands are living in gymnasiums and public halls, waiting for the all clear so that they can go back to their homes, farms and offices. 
But there is no sign that they will be able to do so any time soon. In 1943 - the last time Mt Usu experienced such intense geological activity - there were more than 10 powerful explosions over a four-month period before the mountain settled down. 
Even if people eventually return, it is unlikely that they will ever feel the same about living in the shadow of a volcano. 
"You see the smoke rising, and you realise that the mountain is a living thing," one resident, Matsue Takahata, said. "It's frightening." 

*
Flooded volcano threatens disaster 

Philippines fears deadly mudslides on Mt Pinatubo 

Special report: natural disasters 

John Aglionby, South-east Asia correspondent
Monday August 6, 2001


One of the Philippines' most famous volcanoes, Mount Pinatubo, is filling with water at such a rapid rate that experts are warning of an unstoppable disaster in the coming weeks. 
The British charity Oxfam raised the alarm in a report detailing two months' activity in the caldera (crater) at Pinatubo's summit. Tens of thousands of people will be in danger when the lake overflows and causes an avalanche of mud, rock and water. 
Shaken by the data published last week, the government has formed a coordination taskforce, comprising the Philippines Volcanology and Seismology Agency, the National Disaster Coordination Council (NDCC) and Oxfam, to disseminate information about the impending catastrophe and make preparations for a mass evacuation. 
The distance between the lake surface and the lowest point on the crater rim, known as the freeboard, has shrunk from 8.3 metres (27ft) to 4.5 metres in the last two months, according to the Oxfam team's senior geologist, Professor Kelvin Rodolfo. 
"I'm 100% certain it's going to overspill, unless by some miracle it stops raining," he said. "The only unknown is when, and everything is unpredictable with Pinatubo." 
The wet season began in the third week of May and is expected to last until the beginning of November. Prof Rodolfo, who is based on the volcano's lower slopes, said it was raining hard every day. 
"At the current rate it will take a little under three months for the water to reach the rim, but this is discounting the very real possibility of strong typhoons." 
Prof Rodolfo, of the University of Illinois at Chicago, said there was another 1.7-metre-high pile of loose material on top of the rim but this was likely to compound the problem. "It is very porous and presents hardly any barrier to the rising water," he said. 
Pinatubo, which lies 60 miles north-west of Manila, erupted in June 1991, after lying dormant for 600 years, killing more than 900 people and leaving 250,000 homeless. It left behind a 300-hectare (750-acre) caldera which began filling with water five years ago. 
July Sabit, of the volcanology agency, said it was not known why the water level suddenly started rising more quickly this year. "We started monitoring it in 1997 when we noticed the level was starting to rise," he said. "But in previous rainy seasons it was rising less than a metre a month." 
Prof Rodolfo said that when the water overflowed, the rim would crumble, releasing a torrent. "It's not inconceivable that the spilling water will erode the rim down as much as 30 metres," he said. "This will release 30m cubic metres of water." 
This is only the beginning of the problem, he said: "The water will run down a terrain made up of loose boulders and earth which will break up into a slurry that's much more debris than water." 
After a similar overspill in South Africa, it was estimated that water comprised only 20% of the avalanche. "This means we could have 150m cubic metres crashing down on to a flood plain where 46,000 people live," Prof Rodolfo said. 
In greatest danger are about 3,500 families living in 11 villages on Pinatubo's north-east slope, which is where the water is expected to flow. They were relocated after the 1991 eruption but returned because they were unable to make a satisfactory living from their new land. 
"Pinatubo is like home and a deity to them," said Rosalito Alonso, the team leader. "Their attitude is: 'If we stay here we may die in a flood, but if we go down we will definitely die of hunger'." 
Mr Alonso is now working with non-governmental organisations and the local authorities to educate the villagers about the threat. "Our goal is to prevent massive loss of life, and things are going pretty well, so we should be able to achieve that," he said. 
Oxfam believes that the predicted disaster could have been averted if the authorities had built run-off channels during the last dry season to drain some of the lake. 
"The problem is to do with resources," Lan Mercado, head of Oxfam's Philippines office, said. 
"The government is in a financial crisis, and there is not enough money to go round. 
"And almost every spare helicopter is in the south fighting against the [Muslim insurgents] Abu Sayyaf." 
"However, there is the other side of the equation, which is that the government's attitude is more focused on risk assessment than disaster prevention. 
"This means they don't want to cause unnecessary panic, when perhaps they should have started disseminating information." 
Major-General Melchor Rosales, director of the NDCC, defends the volcanology agency. "They been doing their job and not been remiss in their duties," he said. 
Professional jealousy and embarrassment appear to have been put aside, and the general is now coordinating a taskforce to tackle the crisis. 
"I would say the situation is now under control," he said. 
"We all just have to keep working to make sure it stays that way." 

*
Scientists attempt to drain Philippine volcano 

Special report: natural disasters 

Staff and agencies
Thursday September 6, 2001 

Geologists and vulcanologists today dug a narrow canal at the summit of the Mount Pinatubo volcano in the Philippines in a bid to prevent the lake at its summit from bursting and flooding nearby villages. 
Workers need to funnel a quarter of the lake's 200m cubic metres of water into the nearby Bucao river, or it might break through the crater's upper walls and cause flashfloods. 
Today they dug a small canal at the top of the volcano, which released a stream of muddy water from the lake. 
They then urged workers to pry a larger opening with jets of water, picks and shovels in order to speed the draining. 
Vulcanologists then ruled out the possibility of floods, after discovering the crater rock was harder than previously believed. 
A 25-strong crew today rushed to dig a steeper canal from the lake on top of the 1,445-metre volcano. 
Raymundo Pungonbayan, director of the Philippine Institute of Volcanology and Seismology, said: "Instead of having a good slop so that water can flow out vigorously, it was so gentle that you have a very sluggish flow." 
He said draining might take several days, which is longer than initially estimated. 
Thousands of people were evacuated from the villages in Botolan town 40km from the volcano. Experts said runoff from the crater could have deluged their homes in up to four metres of debris, mud and water. 
But today villagers' fears turned to boredom, curiosity and preoccupation with everyday needs. 
"I'm waiting to see if it will really happen," said resident Dennis Arzadon. 
"We were here at 7am but it's still the same. It's boring." 
A local woman, Beatrice Pacheco, washed her dirty laundry in the river as the crater was breached. 
"There's no water upland and I really have to do the laundry," she said. "My kids have nothing to wear." 
Pinatubo, which is 90km north of Manila, erupted in 1991, killing 800 people. 
The eruption blew the top off the mountain, leaving a hole with a 5.4 sq km area in its summit.

*
North Pembrokeshire & Lanzarote 

Audrey Insch
Saturday February 9, 2002


Volcanoes are always seductive. 
Suddenly the tremendous energy under our feet rears up and roars. So we went up Carn Ingli to see the remains of one of our prehistoric volcanoes, and dream. But the rain obliterated us and the view, wet rocks and mud made slippery stepping. So we went to Lanzarote. 
At the south of the island is Montana Roja, caused by a minor lava flow rising up during the fiery volcanic eruptions of the 18th century. The middle of the crater looks like a dried-up dew pond, with finely cracked clay and an abundance of green herbs and bushes. There were dandelions with dark brown centres, bugloss, dock, tiny flowers of mauve, yellow and blue. Blue pimpernel flourished, hoverflies buzzed and fretted. One species has a brown-black back which sets off the flowers' coloured dots and gives them camouflage against the ground. Fawn butterflies drifted around and then a dragonfly - the first of many 1 saw on an island with no water. They have desalination plants instead; for rainbows they rely on high waves crashing on black volcanic cliffs. Unlike Wales Lanzarote has only dampness, not rain. 
At night the ever-present winds from the Gulf of Mexico pick up Atlantic moisture and drop it on the island whose colours have been formed by more than 300 volcanoes - red, brown, fawn, orange, black. The north has been free of eruptions for much longer. Time and wind have mellowed the landscape. Black fields grow vegetables and vines. The rich soil below the ash can be cultivated, all manually, because the soil would vanish under machinery. Lichens are busy colonising trees and rocks, but they will need millennia to catch up with Carn Ingli and Tycanol wood. 
Home to an old soft country, weathered by wind rain and sun, moist earth you can put your hands into and be muddy, a landscape preparing for spring, green spears, yellow flowers, plump buds - good to be home! 

*
Earthquake, typhoon and volcano all hit island idyll 

Owen Bowcott and agencies
Tuesday July 11, 2000

If you think Britain is enduring a miserable summer, pity the residents of Miyake-jima. The tiny Pacific island has been hit by three natural disasters - an earthquake, a typhoon and an erupting volcano - in the past three days. 
At this time of year Miyake-jima is normally packed with holidaymakers from the Japanese mainland who fly south to swim, spot dolphins or go fishing.
Yesterday the island's 46 hotels and inns and its camp sites were virtually deserted; the twice-daily flights between Miyake-jima and Tokyo less than half full.
The conjunction of cataclysms began two weeks ago when the 815-metre (2,670-ft) Mount Oyama began to rumble. Half of the 4,000-strong population were evacuated from their homes and an undersea explosion shook the island's western coast.
In the last two weeks, Miyake-jima and neighbouring islands have been jolted by thousands of quakes, including one on July 1 which registered 6.4 on the Richter scale and crushed a motorist to death under falling rocks.
Then, on Saturday, Mount Oyama erupted at its peak for the first time in 60 years, according to the meteorological agency in Tokyo. A cloud of yellow ash shot up 800 metres, showering cars, houses and streets with stones. There were no casualties.
On Sunday morning, an earthquake measuring 6.1 sent rocks and mud tumbling, cracked roads and burst a water main. Later in the day, a typhoon that had killed more than 80 people in the Philippines raced up Japan's eastern coast, lashing Miyake-jima with strong winds and heavy rains. Five people were killed on the Japanese mainland.
And there is no end in sight just yet. Yesterday the meteorological agency warned the earthquakes indicate that the volcano will continue to erupt.

*
Wave of destruction 

Bill McGuire looks at the horrifying wall of water that could sweep away a coastal city and cause the greatest natural catastrophe in human history 

Thursday October 12, 2000


Tsunamis are silent, stalking horrors that often appear without warning and with no apparent cause to devastate a coastline thousands of kilometres from their source. 
Compared with earthquakes and volcanic eruptions, images of tsunamis are rare. Anyone close enough to photograph them is usually rewarded with a watery grave alongside the fragmented remains of the camera. 
Most result from large submarine earthquakes that give the sea floor and the water above such a jolt that waves shoot outwards in all directions. In the last century alone, earthquakes around the Pacific rim produced over 400 tsunamis in this way resulting in the loss of over 50,000 lives. 
Volcanoes can also produce devastating tsunamis, with the cataclysmic 1883 eruption of Krakatoa (Indonesia) churning up the sea sufficiently to produce lethal waves that killed 36,000 people. 
Submarine landslides are also particularly effective: a gigantic collapse off the coast of Norway around 7,000 years ago resulted in north-eastern Scotland being inundated by huge waves. 
Even scarier are the mega-tsunamis formed by gigantic landslides at ocean island volcanoes. Before the last Ice Age a chunk of rock ten times the size of the Isle of Wight fell off the flank of the Mauna Loa volcano on the Big Island of Hawaii, forming tsunamis that raged 320m up the sides of neighbouring islands and even pounded the coastline of New South Wales 7,000km away. 
Scarier still, when a 1km asteroid plunged into the southeast Pacific just over two million years ago it sent a 70m wave of destruction hurtling across the entire Pacific. 
They are very different from the normal, wind-driven waves that break millions of times a day on our shores. One of their strangest properties is the Jekyll and Hyde transformation as they approach the shore. In deep water a tsunami is to all intents and purposes invisible; a wave less than a metre high that is lost among the troughs and peaks of a turbulent sea. 
Only when the tsunami enters shallow water does it start to build in height as the front of the wave slows and is caught by more water from behind. In a matter of minutes a half-metre swell can become a wall of water 20m or more high. And if the waves are focused into estuaries and bays, this height can increase even further. This behaviour sheds light on the derivation of the term "tsunami", which in the original Japanese means 'harbour wave'. 
The building of a tsunami as it approaches a coastline also results in another of its weird properties. As the wave increases in size it sucks in water that causes the sea to retreat from the shore, sometimes as far as the horizon or beyond - collecting it all together for the big push. 
Unless the local population has been educated in the mysteries of the tsunami, this can be lethal as thousands rush curiously on to the exposed sea-bed only to be battered by the sudden appearance of the tsunami itself. And can they move? In deep water, tsunamis can move at speeds in excess of 800km an hour - as fast as a jet aircraft - and even when the wave slows as it enters the shallows there is no possibility of outrunning it. 
Another difference between tsunamis and wind-driven storm waves is that the entire column of water from the sea surface to the sea floor, perhaps several kilometres high, is involved in the wave motion. 
So, for example, the entire volume of the ocean is involved in the transmission of a tsunami from one side of the Pacific to the other. Trying to cram all this movement into progressively shallowing waters is part of the reason for the terrifying height increase as a tsunami approaches a coastline. The water simply has nowhere else to go but up. 
But it is not only the spectacular height and power of tsunamis that makes them so destructive. When they hit the coast they just keep coming - perhaps for 20 to 30 minutes - before taking the same time to drain back into the ocean. This is because a tsunami wavelength is typically hundreds of kilometres long rather than the few tens of metres characteristic of storm waves. 
Such long waves reflect the scale of the phenomena that generate tsunamis. If a submarine quake thrusts upwards an area of sea floor the size of England by a metre or two then you can be sure that the ripples formed will be of a comparably spectacular scale. 
The destructive power of a tsunami is truly awesome. Ships and coastal installations are smashed to matchwood in seconds and solid metal structures such as parking metres are combed flat. A three-storey building would be lucky to survive an impact from a 10m wave, while a 20m wave would leave a five storey office block much the worse for wear. 
A fragile human caught in the open has almost no chance of survival and severe battering by debris results in few bodies being recovered intact. Many, in fact, are carried far out into the ocean never to be seen again. 
Things have been relatively quiet on the tsunami front since 1998 when an offshore earthquake and accompanying submarine landslide generated a series of waves that flattened villages and took 3,000 lives on the north coast of New Guinea . Sadly, further big earthquakes are sure to repeat this scenario time and time again in coming years. 
Waiting in the wings, however, is the terrifying prospect of the coming Atlantic mega-tsunami. The western flank of the Cumbre Vieja volcano on the Canary Island of La Palma remains unstable and poised to slide into the sea. Recent modelling has shown that when this happens the initial wave will be 600m high. Eight hours later, as the wall of water bears down on the east coast of the United States and the Caribbean Islands, the human race will face the greatest natural catastrophe in its history. You have been warned! 
 Bill McGuire is the Benfield Greig professor of geohazards and director of the Benfield Greig Hazard research centre at University College London. The coming Atlantic Mega-tsunami is the focus of tonight's Horizon programme on BBC2 at 9.30pm

*
Rage of the gods 

For centuries, humankind has gazed in awe at the world's volcanoes. Even today, vulcanologists are unable to predict their fiery tantrums. But for Melanie McGrath, a self-confessed volcano junkie, the power of nature's devastating time-bombs is as life-enhancing as is their will to destroy 

Saturday October 12, 2002


A year ago this summer I travelled to Sicily to watch Mount Etna erupt. I did this on a whim. Police had cordoned off the roads leading to the summit, so we drove as close as we could, up to a tree-lined parking bay a few kilometres from Sapienza, where lava from the eruption had already incinerated the ski-lift and a tourist lodge, and was rolling down to meet the road above us. It was the middle of the day and the sun was obscured by cloud, the sky a dark yellow-grey and stinking. A few spectators had gathered at the cordon. A few more stayed in their cars, all the better to make a quick getaway, if it became necessary. At one end of the bay an enterprising trader had set up a stall selling coffee, panini and the little almond biscuits typical of the region. The rumble of stomachs was lost in the louder geologic grumbling, and no one had much of an appetite. Someone joked that if fate brought the lava stream our way, there might at least be time to order a decent double espresso and leave this world on a high. There was all the usual anxious camaraderie and morbid humour you get on such occasions. 
Several hundred metres above us, two vast Plinian eruption columns spewed ash over Sicily. The smoke rolled like waves and there was a slight shaking of the ground. It felt as though the world was on the move. Ash came down as black rain, making a sound like the hissing of breakwater through the pines and junipers. From time to time an unnaturally hot wind gusted down, as though fleeing the summit to safety. Ash collected on my lungs and a small pile of grit settled in my stomach. It was one of those rare moments when the internal organs lose their mystery and make themselves known, just as the volcano itself was. We were suddenly intensely aware of our mortality and of the murky fragility of human offal. 
At the end of the parking bay, furthest from the coffee stall, a handful of amateur vulcanologists stood on the wrong side of the police cordon, taking notes. Beside these men, in the gathering dust, lay various Heath Robinson-style gadgets - lovingly crafted, no doubt, in potting sheds as far apart as Cardiff and Sofia, from bits of old ham radio and the like. They spoke rarely, in English, in a dozen different accents, flexing the technical jargon of their hobby. Words such as pyroclastic, Strombolian, phreatic, maar and magma drifted up to meet the eggy air. They wore insouciant expressions, as if to emphasise that the boiling tumult above them was all in a day's work for men such as they, and from time to time paid grave attention to waterproof notepads and twiddled instrument dials to prove the point. 
For thousands of years Etna has imbued everything around it with a sense of doom that would seem melodramatic were it not for the very real threat posed by the volcano's regular eruptions. The little villages poised on its foothills are dependent on the rich soils for the success of their grape, apricot and almond crops, but subject also to swamping and demolition. In 1971, an eruption destroyed the observatory built to give warnings of the event. In 1992, the town of Zafferana Etnea was part buried. In 2001, it was Sapienza's turn. 
Catania is the nearest major city to Etna. A construction of volcanic tuff and basalt, it is dominated both physically and economically by the volcano. Once a great port, the huddled and depressing city streets have fallen prey to the enervating parasitism of the mafia; its citizens now depend for a living on the tourism that Etna brings. Every so often, as if offering a lesson in hubris, Etna reminds the city who is boss. In 1669, the place was completely destroyed, its castle surrounded by a moat of molten rock. It seems appropriate that the mafia hold out here. It is a place for dark business done by violent means. 
A brawny Frenchman emerged from the haze above us, sooty-faced and sweating from the heat. He'd been to see the lava flow where it crossed the road about 2km beyond the cordon and reported that a better view was to be had from the other side of the volcano. We drove around the foothills towards the town of Adrano on the western slopes, and from there took a semi-paved side road uphill. A few kilometres from Sapienza, we again came up against a police cordon, but a better tended one. Here, many people were gathered to watch the sun come down behind the plumes of ash, staining them a downy red-brown: from where we were standing, they looked like the great iron columns of a king-sized Victorian railway station rusting in the black rain. 
The eruption was, as the Frenchman had promised, more dramatic from this vantage. As the sun retreated, the ashy plumes dissolved into darkness, leaving bright patches here and there as the flow of lava cracked, exposing its flaming interior. We clambered in the dark across tuff, silent or speaking in low whispers. Ash ticked against the rock, and every so often a low, loud growling issued from the lower crater, followed by a boom as magma burst into the air in a Roman candle and began to creep down the mountainside, shuddering the ground on either side. As the lava roiled, I thought I could smell the pine and juniper trees it was burning up on its lightless procession towards Catania and the sea. The contradictory nature of the scene struck me very forcefully. This was something both of the earth and otherworldly. We had entered geologic time. 
I can tell you when I climbed my first volcano. It was about 15 years ago, and the cone in question was Volcan Agua in Guatemala. I climbed it for the view, but, as so often with volcanoes, a band of cloud ringed the summit and obscured everything more than a metre or two away. My companion and I got lost; darkness fell before we could find our way back down, and I became rather tearful at the prospect of a night on the shale. All the same, something must have woken in me as I napped on the slopes that night, because I've been clambering up volcanoes ever since. Ordinary mountains bore me, but there's something at the top of a volcano beyond the abstract notion of a summit. There's a crater. (OK, it's not always at the top.) Volcano fans such as myself will go any distance just to be able to gaze down into that ultimate depth. Jules Verne set his Journey To The Centre Of The Earth at the volcanic glacier of Snaefell in Iceland. The villain's den in You Only Live Twice is a hole in a volcano. Hell is to be found there. I've been, so I know. 
The euphemistically named Yucca Mountain, near Las Vegas, Nevada, is actually an extinct volcano, in which the US is currently planning to store its high-grade nuclear waste. I visited it to report for this newspaper. A mile inside its bowels there is a Bond-like scene - caves and tunnels filled with scientists and other madmen tweaking Geiger counters, checking the viability of waste plutonium pellets and, in one way or another, planning world domination. 
Aside from the crater, the appeal for me is the peculiarly archaic nature of the cone. It's impossible to imagine dinosaurs without envisioning a backdrop of volcanoes behind. There is something transcendent and sublime about them - also, as a consequence, something slightly florid, even camp. The 19th-century American landscape painter, Frederic Church, instinctively knew this when he painted Cotopaxi, Ecuador, in mid-eruption. I saw the painting in a recent exhibition at Tate Britain. Church first visited Cotopaxi in 1861 and painted it in repose; a year later, he was asked to repaint the thing erupting, apparently as a symbol of the American civil war. 
In western culture, volcanoes are generally associated with Boys' Own values, dangerous adventure and furious passions. It was the Roman god Vulcan, after all, who forged Apollo's bronze arrows and Hercules' armour, and was himself possessed of a grand temper. There's a certain undeniable sexual symbolism, which no doubt titillates the lads at some, perhaps unconscious, level. I don't want to press this, but I ask you to note that most volcanoes are breast-shaped and, when erupting, more or less ejaculate. That pretty much covers all bases. 
Vulcanologists, both amateur and professional, come equipped with a reputation for obsession and spoddishness that makes mere volcano enthusiasts, such as myself, rather wary of them. As a consequence of this prejudice, I have avoided their company over the years, happy to watch from the sidelines as they plunge across antique lava flows, messing with their instruments and peering bug-eyed into quaking fissures. There are around 700 professional vulcanologists operating around the world today. Out of a sense of fairness, I rang a few and asked them what it was that drove them to devote a life to cones. 
Grant Heiken, former president of the International Association of Vulcanology, was 12 when he came across a book about the emergence and eruption in 1943 of Volcan Paricutín in a cornfield in Mexico. "I digested it from cover to cover," he says. "I just had to understand what happened, the mechanics of the thing." 
For Magns Tumi Gudmundsson, a vulcanologist based in Reykjavik, "It was the eruption of [the Icelandic volcano] Hekla when I was nine years old that stays fixed in my memory," he says. "I remember the fine ash falling - it was almost invisible, but you could feel it on your skin. Most of my work has to do with eruptions under ice. We are dealing with the forces of fire, ice and water. The fieldwork involves working in a landscape that is so raw, intense and changeable that you feel privileged just to be there." 
It was this same dynamism that attracted Steve Sparks, now a professor at Bristol University. "Volcanoes are unusual in geology in that eruptions happen fast," he says, "and you can directly observe the processes. And, yes, it does have a kind of glamour." Needless to say, cone-love is a dangerous kind of romance. In the past 30 years, 23 professional vulcanologists have lost their lives while working near or on volcanoes. 
The mannish impulse to master nature is, in the case of the volcano, a very good and necessary thing. Millions of people live in the shadow of cones, most of them poor farmers, dependent on the rich volcanic soils. The development of predictive technologies such as ultrasound, as well as detailed computer simulations for lava flows - and, most recently, the use of satellites to monitor ground distortions - all make eruptions easier to predict. Using satellite technology, scientists at the California Institute of Technology very recently detected volcanic activity in four Andean volcanoes (Uturuncu in Bolivia, Cerro Blanco, on the southern rim of the Robledo caldera in Argentina, Hualca Hualca in Peru - all of which had been thought extinct - and the previously unknown but now named Lazufre on the border between Chile and Argentina). Even so, the science of volcanic eruptions is still not fully understood, and there is much work to be done - research that is made more complex by the fact that every volcano is unique. But science itself cannot guarantee safety, particularly since so many volcanoes are in areas with few economic resources. 
There are no records as to how many people are buried under Etna, but it must be a great many: the volcano has come alive every few years since written records began. Pindar wrote the first recorded description of an eruption in 475BC ("From the mountain pure springs of unapproachable fire are vomited from the inmost depths"). Virgil witnessed another, and said it was the burning breath of the Titan Enceladus as he struggled to free himself from the underground prison to which Zeus had condemned him. A hundred years or so before, the Greek philosopher Empedocles lived in an observatory high up the slopes of Etna and eventually, convinced by his own intellectual investment in hot air that the escaping gases would support his weight, threw himself into the crater. That's philosophy for you. 
Things have moved on somewhat since then, though it is only recently, since the early 1990s, that vulcanologists have concentrated their efforts on minimising the hazards presented by the cones. Before that, research tended to focus on the whys and wherefores of eruptions, rather than their effect on proximal human populations. Since 1995, an international group of city planners, medics, vulcanologists, politicians and aid agencies has been meeting biannually, under the rubric of Cities On Volcanoes, to plan for possible disasters. It will take much longer, of course, to shift the cultural rubble. 
For me, standing watching Etna, the scene was much the same as it had been for Pindar, Virgil and their suicidal friend: freighted with age-old personifications and imbued with the crude symbolism of the eruption as a manifestation of anger, violence, instability, the primitive, the id. Its moral symbolism was fresh in my mind, too: the idea of a refurbishment, of resurrection, a turning inside-out, of the emergence of something elemental and virtuous - a "truth", of some kind. 
This past summer, exactly a year after my trip to Etna, I found myself standing on another volcano on the other side of the world. Mombacho on the shores of Lake Nicaragua has long been dormant. In its old glory days, it calved islands in the lake where palm trees and cottonwoods now grow. The lower slopes of the volcano have for hundreds of years provided a living for coffee growers. Beyond the plantation terraces, at the higher elevations, the cloud forest stretches to the sky, dank, still and archaic. Ferns, bromeliads, lianas and orchids spring from the branches of trees; 119 species of bird live among their leaves, and pumas and ocelots are said to prowl about at Mombacho's summit. Remnants of the Jurassic scurry about in the form of iguanas and salamanders, part concealed in the ever present mist. Mombacho has a deeply undisturbed air; the forest is primary, ancient and uncut. In spite of the presence of the plantations, there were no coffee stalls here, no police cordons or amateur vulcanologists. Mombacho's offerings are less obviously dramatic than Etna's, but together they add up to something profound. 
Scientists now know that the earth's atmosphere was formed from the ancient eruptions of cones long since extinct. We breathe the breath of volcanoes, purified and augmented by forests such as the one on Mombacho. And that brings me to the wonderful paradox of volcanoes and the real source of their fascination for me. Living volcanoes have so often brought death to everything around them that it is easy to forget this one fact: it was dead volcanoes that first breathed us into life 

*
Science update 

Tim Radford 
Thursday December 16, 1999

Mudshed and bloodshed 
It isn't always the eruption that kills, the University at Buffalo vulcanologist Michael Sheridan told the American Geophysical Union on Tuesday. Dormant volcanoes - in the north-west, in Mexico and other places - are also a threat. Collapsing soft spots on the mountainside could be enough to trigger devastating mudflows which can flow for up to 80 miles. "This is the frightening part about it. These volcanoes don't have to erupt. They just sit there and a part of it comes roaring off," he said. "We have to pay more attention to these older volcanoes that have been sitting around for a while, stewing in their own juices." It created problems for development near Seattle and Tacoma, below Mt Rainier in Washington state, where there is a history of mudflows. "People are not willing to accept the concept that this is a really dangerous area." 

*
Thousands flee Congo eruption 

Fires rage as mile-wide river of lava engulfs village 

Helen Vesperini in Goma
Friday January 18, 2002


A volcano with a deadly past erupted yesterday in Congo, forcing thousands of residents to flee as fires started by the lava spread to the eastern border town of Goma, witnesses said. 
People clutching possessions, from sewing machines to ducks, abandoned villages in the path of the molten rock, some leaving relatives behind. 
"I left my father and my grandmother," said one refugee, Boniface, 20. "My grandmother refused to move and my father refused to leave his mother. I think they're going to die soon,". 
Buildings and trees caught fire and crashed to the ground as winds fanned flames sparked by the lava from the 3,469-metre (11,380ft) Nyiragongo volcano, creating a spectacular orange glow in a starless sky. 
"I've never seen so much fire in my life. I look up at the volcano and all I see is burning trees and fire," said Karine Morency, a worker at the United Nations base in the Goma area. "It's hard to imagine that nobody has been killed in the villages near the mountain. Everything smells like burning." 
Trucks, buses and cars crammed the streets of Goma, a major crossing point into Rwanda, as residents sought to escape. The ash and molten rock swept to within half a mile of the UN base and Goma's airport. 
By late afternoon, aid workers said lava flows had advanced about five-and-a-half miles. The volcano erupted at 9.30am. Ms Morency said at least one village appeared to have been destroyed as had a road north to the town of Rutshuru. The lava flow was more than a mile wide, she said. 
A UN spokesman in the Con golese capital, Kinshasa, said the agency had moved more than 400 staff to Goma and was ready to retreat into neighbouring Rwanda if the situation worsened. 
In 1977, scores died when a lake of lava burst through fissures in Nyiragongo at 40mph, which experts said was the fastest lava flow on record. 
The volcano is one of eight on the borders of Rwanda, the Democratic Republic of Congo and Uganda. The tropical rain forests in the region are home to rare mountain gorillas. A World Wildlife Fund official in Nairobi said the gorillas were unlikely to face any immediate threat. 
Only two of the volcanos are active - Nyamuragira, which erupted early last year, causing no casualties, and Nyiragongo. Nyiragongo was last active in 1994 when a lava lake in its crater reappeared, casting an orange light on to clouds at night. 

*
Moon's hard heart just a fallacy 

Matthew Genge on the soft, warm centre of Earth's closest neighbour 

Thursday April 18, 2002


Despite the fact that lovers are supposedly driven to romantic excess by its light, the moon is a harsh and lifeless place. Even geologically, the moon is considered to have cooled long ago and be entirely dead. New research, however, presented at the Lunar and Planetary Science Conference in Houston, suggests that the moon's endless affair with the Earth betrays its deep-down warm nature. 
Our satellite has been thought completely dead because it is too small to retain heat. However, shortly after its formation, from the hot debris of a giant impact with the Earth, the moon was mostly molten. It was during this stage that the lunar highlands, which make up the pale mountainous regions of the moon, formed. 
These consist of rocks made from the low density mineral feldspar and are thought to have formed as the scum floating on top of a giant magma ocean. In only 90m years, a short amount of time compared with the 4.5bn year history of the moon, the magma ocean is thought to have crystallised. 
Later in the history of our satellite, magma was generated by the remelting of rocks within the interior of the moon by huge impacts. These magmas erupted at the surface to fill in the giant craters and form the dark, smooth plains of the lunar Maria that make up the pattern of the man in the moon. The ages of lava returned by the Apollo missions suggest that these basalts ceased to erupt by 3.2bn years ago. The last of the lunar volcanoes are thought to have become extinct more than 2.5bn years ago. 
The moon has, therefore, been thought geologically dead for at least the last 2.5bn years, in marked contrast to our planet, whose surface is covered with thousands of active volcanoes. The Earth has a molten metal outer core and a partially molten zone below the crust where melting occurs due to the churning of its interior, which brings up hot rocks from depth. In the moon there is no convection and it is thought to be completely solid from its surface to its core. 
However, Dr James Williams, a scientist at Nasa's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in California, thinks differently. Williams and colleagues have been studying the shape of the moon, which has now been determined more accurately by using lasers. The measurements were made by bouncing lasers off mirrors placed on the moon by the Apollo astronauts. 
The time the light takes to make the trip to the moon and back allows the Earth-to-moon distance to be identified to within two cm and the moon's shape to be determined. The measurements indicate that the moon is not always the same shape but bulges in and out by as much as 10cm as it orbits the Earth. It is this flabby wobble that Williams has used to determine the moon's deepest secrets. 
Our satellite, it seems, is not the perfect sphere it appears to be, but is stretched out by the pull of the Earth. The near-side of the moon is closer to the Earth and is pulled more by our planet's gravity than the far-side. It is this difference in force that stretches our satellite. The changes in the moon's shape occur because its orbit around the Earth is an ellipse. Sometimes the moon is closer to the Earth and the moon is stretched more than when it is further away. This bulging of the moon due to differences in the Earth's gravitational pull is similar to the bulge in the Earth's oceans that produces the tides. 
Just how much the moon's shape changes is given by its Love numbers, which describe how much the moon's 3D shape differs from a sphere. The latest measurements made by Williams of the moon's Love numbers are much higher than would be expected for a completely solid moon, even though they are lower than those of our own partially molten planet. Nevertheless, the moon, it seems, bulges too much to be a solid ball of cold rock. 
Computer models conducted by Williams suggest that a zone of partially molten mantle at below 1,000 km depth would most readily explain the high values of the moon's Love numbers. This hot, partially molten interior makes the moon deform more easily and thus explains its bulging. The existence of magma at depth in the moon, Williams argues, is not precluded by cooling since, like the Earth, the moon's interior is heated by the decay of radioactive elements and we are uncertain of exactly how many of these the moon contains. 
The absence of young volcanoes on the moon is because its interior is not churned by convection and the hot rocks at depth are no longer brought close enough to the surface. 
The presence of partially molten rock deep inside the moon is just a leftover from its hot past. It does mean, however, that romantic moments in the moonlight need not be spoilt by the reality of its cold, armadillo-like surface. After all, even the moon is hot and squishy inside. 

*
Goma faces horror of more lava flows 

James Astill in Goma
Sunday January 20, 2002 

The volcano that has devastated the town of Goma in the Democratic Republic of Congo and made up to half a million people homeless erupted again yesterday, threatening what relief agencies warned would be 'an unimaginable humanitarian catastrophe'. 
Vulcanologists who flew over Mount Nyiragongo saw through its sulphurous haze a new crater, seven miles below the main volcano. The cone is two metres high and was spewing lava six metres into the air. The lava was streaming down towards the town's airport, which has massive reserves of jet fuel. 
Goma faced renewed misery after a night and day in which a mass migration was followed by fear and disorder. Early yesterday, as a night sky lit neon-orange by the burning lava turned into a hazy dawn, many crossed back into Congo from nearby Rwanda, where they had sought refuge, to inspect their homes. Others came to loot. 
The United Nations says that the death toll is so far 45, but it will rise as the scale of destruction becomes apparent. At least 15 looters are reported shot by police. 
Up to half a million were seriously at risk of malnutrition and disease, stranded without food, drinking water or shelter along the shores of Lake Kivu. Aid agencies were struggling to bring in emergency relief. 
A river of lava half a mile wide had bulldozed through the town centre, oozing into sidestreets and pouring into the lake on the far side. A fug of hot air and sulphurous steam hung over the burning ruins. Creaking and groaning, the lava slowed and cooled into a wall of black rock, three metres deep in places. 
Youths looted abandoned shops and scavenged the remnants of household possessions. 'Goma is finished. There is nothing to do but take what we can,' said Cedric Kabo, as behind him a smartly dressed man pulled a bright, green dress through a smashed shop window. 
Patrick Gabo, one of the few who remained in Goma throughout the eruption, said his parents were too infirm to flee. 'There are a few of us still here, though one woman died from the fumes yesterday,' he said. 'Even if there is another eruption, I will not go. Now I am poor. If I lose my house, I will have nothing.' 
At a hospital run by the Sisters of Charity Order, Dr Achille Mudiandanbu despaired of the crowds traipsing through the wreckage. 'The fumes are very toxic, they can kill you,' he said. 
Though Goma's rebel authorities had no news of the western side of town, cut off by lava, refugees said those trapped there had made it across to the Rwandan side. 
But aid workers said up to 100,000 people could still be stranded between two lava flows, pouring from fissures at the base of the volcano, between Goma and Sake, 20 miles to the west. 
On a beach outside Goma, where the Rwandan shore of Lake Kivu begins, crowds of refugees were gathered, watching a 150ft column of steam rising where the lava entered the lake half a mile away. Women washed and cooked with the toxic waters, despite thousands of dead fish floating on the surface. 

*
Under fire Mexico holds its breath as Popocatepetl erupts 

Jo Tuckman in Mexico City
Wednesday December 20, 2000


A volcano 40 miles outside Mexico City erupted on Monday night, spitting red-hot rocks into the sky and prompting the evacuation of nearly 50,000 people. 
The interior minister, Santiago Creel, said yesterday that the Popocatepetl volcano had calmed down but added that a critical period was now approaching. 
President Vicente Fox, who called for caution and calm in a late-night address to the nation on Monday, was expected to tour the refugee shelters yesterday. 
The overnight eruptions, televised live, lit up the sky with bright red sprays and turned the cone into a twinkling incandescent carpet. 
It was "Popo's" most intense activity since historical records began with the Spanish conquest nearly 500 years ago. Constant monitoring started in 1994 after an eruption ended 70-odd years of slumber. 
No injuries or major damage was reported, although many feared further eruptions could melt a glacier and send an avalanche of acidic sludge towards abandoned villages. The last catastrophic eruption happened 1,200 years ago. 
There were warnings of ash showers in nearby towns. The 18 million people of Mexico City, north-west of the 5,451-metre (17,884-feet) volcano, was not expected to be affected because of southerly winds. 

*
Sicilian emergency as Etna erupts 

Rory Carroll in Rome
Saturday July 21, 2001


Italian army helicopters flew through smoke and ash yesterday to spray water over rivers of lava spilling down the slopes of Mount Etna, Europe's most active volcano. 
An emergency was declared and roads were closed off as the molten rock flowed at 10 cubic metres a second towards the village of Nicolosi, in eastern Sicily. 
Workers built walls of mud and asphalt to divert the lava and assured villagers that their homes would be safe, despite a new fissure cracking open on the southern slope. But a small resort with two restaurants will almost certainly be destroyed, said Enrico Galeani, a civil protection official. 
Several acres of chestnut groves and pine trees were destroyed as the magma, belching steam and ash, slid across Route 92. Fresh eruptions in two craters shook the mountain. 
An aeroplane with water cannon was expected to join the bombardment last night in the hope of cooling and slowing the flow. 
Locals further down the slope were sceptical of assurances that they were not at risk. Salvatore Moschetto, the mayor of Nicolosi, population 5,000, was reported to have asked authorities to use explo sives before the magma, about four miles away, crept closer. 
"The situation is critical. If the lava continues to come out at this speed, it will be on Nicolosi within a week." 
The state of emergency means that army reinforcements and central government funding can be tapped at short notice. 
Ski lifts were shrouded in ash and winter sports were expected to be called off for the one year needed for the lava to cool. 
Etna - at 3,320 metres (10,890ft) high - is the tallest volcano in Europe. The lava has travelled more than 1,000 metres down, but is likely to slow down as the slopes become broader and less steep, said Alfredo Pace, head of Catania's police force. 
A 40-year-old tourist who entered an off-limits area to get a better view broke his back after panicking and tripping over rocks. The spectacle is visible from almost all of eastern Sicily. 
The volcano has spouted lava, ash and smoke intermittently since January last year 
Etna last threatened inhabited areas in 1992 when lava streams headed towards Zafferana, a town of 7,000 people crouched on the lower slopes. Controlled explosions diverted the flow.

*
Fiery warning: Evacuation for 30,000 after Philippine volcano erupts 

Jonathan Watts in Tokyo
Friday February 25, 2000


Apprehensive Philippine villagers look on as the Mayon volcano erupts in a series of explosions, spewing lava and super-heated ash over a wide area around its base. 
Lava began gushing out of Mayon's crater before dawn yesterday, accompanied by loud rumblings. A brightly glowing lava river snaked 3.5 miles down the mountain's slopes, about about 200 miles south-east of Manila on the island of Luzon. Ash rained as far as seven miles away and burning rocks were thrown six miles into the sky. 
While there were no reports of injuries, it was estimated that more than 18 villages around the volcano had been evacuated of some 30,000 residents. 
"We became so scared we decided to leave," said Judel Mirandilla, 14, of Bonga village. She was awoken at 1am by a series of explosions from the eruption. "Other people were waking up our neighbours" to move out. 
Fourteen explosions were recorded by late afternoon, according to the Philippine Institute of Volcanology and Seismology, indicating that magma is still rising to the dome and that the volcanic activity could continue for some time, said Juan Cordon, a research specialist at the institute. 
Ash rained down on large areas west of the volcano and the authorities closed the airport in Legazpi, the closest city to the volcano. 
The 2,460-metre (8,118ft) mountain has been emitting ash plumes and occasional lava flows for about a week.

*
Volcano covers Quito in white ash 

Gustavo Oviedo in Quito
Saturday November 27, 1999


Residents in Ecuador's capital Quito woke up yesterday to a covering of white ash after the Guagua Pichincha volcano erupted, shutting schools and the airport in the city of 1.2m. 
Quito residents walked the powdered streets wearing protective face masks after the eruption on Thursday night, which officials from the country's geophysics institute said was of "moderate magnitude". 
A light rain of ash continued to fall yesterday as traffic disturbed the dust to obscure the morning sky. 
Quito's mayor, Roque Sevilla, asked for calm and told residents to use masks to protect their eyes and lungs from abrasive ash. He also asked them to help sweep the streets. 
Mr Sevilla said Quito would remain on yellow alert - meaning the volcano, located 7.5 miles from the city, could erupt again within weeks or months. 
He said ash was likely to continue falling as the volcanic activity continued and winds blew in from Guagua Pichincha, or "baby Pichincha" in the Quechua Indian language. 
The city's airport, situated near the centre of town, was closed while the runway was swept, an airport official said. 
The minister of education, Rosangela Adoum, said classes for the city's 400,000 pupils were suspended until further notice. 
Quito sits in what locals call "volcano alley", a ring of nine active volcanoes that surround the city, which is cradled in a 9,446ft-high (2,880-metre) valley in the Andes mountains. 
Guagua Pichincha has been rumbling since September and has shut the airport half a dozen times since then. 
The volcano, whose crater is 15,724ft (4,794 metres) above sea level, belched out a massive mushroom cloud of steam and smoke in early October. 
Its status has since remained on yellow alert after moving between yellow and orange alert (where an eruption is thought likely in days or weeks) several times since September. It has yet to reach red alert, where an eruption is imminent in hours or minutes. 
Guagua Pichincha last erupted 340 years ago. An eruption now could shower Quito with volcanic ash. 

*
Villagers flee stream of lava from Mount Cameroon 

By Emmanuel Tumanjong in Yaounde
Tuesday March 30, 1999 

Cameroonians were fleeing their villages yesterday after Mount Cameroon erupted at the weekend, causing violent quakes and fiery lava flows that destroyed homes in the area, state radio reported. 
Tremors began on Saturday night, officials said. By Sunday, lava began flowing down the southern slopes of the volcano - also known as Mount Faka, or Chariots of the Gods - towards the nearby villages of Edenau and Bakingele and a state-owned oil refinery 15 miles away. 
There were no immediate reports of casualties and the extent of the damage was unclear. A number of village huts were destroyed in the lava flows, the state radio station said without providing details. 
Government officials called for calm. 
But a Cameroonian geology professor, Isaac Konfor Njilah, said several thousand villagers faced danger from burning magma and poisonous gases. The ash could spark bush fires in the forests, he added. 
The lava could 'bury anything it finds in its way, cause bush fires and forest fires, destroy farmland houses and kill by incineration,' he said. 
He said the lava was flowing in two streams, one of which was heading towards the Sonora state oil refinery on the outskirts of Limbe, a seaside resort town about 15 miles south of the peak. 
Radio reported that the residents of Limbe were 'worried by the persistent and worsening rumbling of the volcano throughout the night'. 
A statement from provincial government officials said the situation was 'under control', but added that the lava could flow a long way before solidifying. 
The 13,428ft volcano, one of the country's main tourist attractions, is 45 miles west of Douala, Cameroon's commercial hub and 180 miles west of the capital Yaounde. Each year the mountain draws thousands of people who take part in a race up its black, rocky slopes. 
Rising gradually from the Gulf of Guinea, it is the highest peak in central and west Africa. It has erupted five times in the past century, most recently in 1982. - AP. 

*
Japanese volcano erupts 

The site of the eruption: graphic 

News Unlimited staff and agencies
Friday March 31, 2000 

Japan's snow-capped Mount Usu volcano erupted today, spewing out a huge column of smoke and ash and hurling a flood of volcanic ash and rock toward a small nearby town. 
There were no reports of injuries or damage, and the eruption appeared to be abating - at least temporarily - three hours after it sent a huge column of ash and debris shooting into the sky early in the afternoon. 
Officials warned that the danger was far from over, however. "It is possible that widespread damage could result from this eruption," chief cabinet spokesman Mikio Aoki said from the government's emergency headquarters in Tokyo. Prime minister Keizo Obuchi was also at the headquarters monitoring the situation. 
Roughly 51,000 people live in the coastal city of Date and several smaller towns near Usu, 475 miles north of Tokyo on the island of Hokkaido. Experts had predicted the eruption because of increased seismic activity that began earlier this week, and the evacuation of more than 11,000 people began on Wednesday. 
Almost immediately after the eruption, volcanic ash began to rain down on nearby towns. Residents downwind were soon also enveloped by the pungent, rotten smell of sulphur. The coast guard, military and police mobilised to evacuate the town of Abuta, which lies between the volcano and the sea. It has a population of 13,000, but thousands had already been evacuated and it was not immediately known how many people were still there. 
Seven ships, two helicopters and several dozen trucks were deployed amid concerns at the possibility of landslides or mudslides caused by melting snow. Before the eruption, snow 1ft deep covered much of the 2,416-ft volcano. There had been no rumbling, no explosion and no screams. Mount Usu erupted in the afternoon in near silence, just a blue-grey plume of rock and ash billowing over the crater and down the snowy slopes. 
"I didn't feel anything, I didn't hear anything," said Norimichi Nagao, a resident of nearby Date, which escaped the ash fall. "I didn't know there was an eruption until I saw it on television." With so many residents in the three towns evacuated, the eruption became more of a public spectacle than a threat. People rushed onto the streets and rooftops to take photographs, relaxed and prepared after days of high-level warnings. 
Cars coming in from other areas around the mountain were covered in dust, however, and Abuta and Sobetsu were ghost towns. "Some kids and some parents are a bit jittery, but you couldn't call this a panic," said Daisuke Kadoaki, an official at the Abuta town office. He said nearly all of the residents had left. 
The number of people in evacuation centres is however expected to rise. Prime Minister Keizo Obuchi has warned that evacuees may have to stay put for a while, and said the government would consider building temporary housing. At the centres, where families are marking off private space with blankets and cardboard partitions, officials are concerned about the effects of stress. 
Two people were killed and 200 homes destroyed in mudslides following Usu's last eruptions, which began in 1977 and continued for several months into the following year. Today, the plume rose from the volcano amid generally clear skies. Within two hours, it had risen to a height of 10,560 feet. Mobile phone service was briefly cut off, but was quickly restored. Some domestic flights to Hokkaido were suspended, but international flights were not delayed. 
Most of the ash appeared to be wafting northeast over a nearby lake, and not over the more populous areas. "We are worried that the wind direction will change," said Date mayor Hidekichi Kikuya. "We have been spared so far, but that could change." 
This is the seventh major eruption of Mount Usu in the past 300 years. Fifty people died when the volcano erupted in 1822 in its most lethal eruption. Japan, one of the world's most eruption-prone countries, has not had a fatal eruption since 1991. An eruption of the 4,459-foot Mount Unzen that year sent avalanches of hot rocks sweeping through the outskirts of the town of Shimabara, in southern Japan, killing 43 people and leaving nearly 2,300 homeless. Officials were concerned that Usu would also spew a similar mix of gas and rocks. 

*
Fatal volcano trip row boils over  
 
A science expedition to Colombia which ended in nine deaths has led to a feud over blame - and now 
Hollywood is interested too  
 
Robin McKie 
Sunday March 25, 2001 
  
It was supposed to be a quiet scientific expedition, a study trip designed to find ways to predict volcanic eruptions. But the visit to Galeras ended in disaster when the Colombian volcano exploded and engulfed the researchers - including one of Britain's finest volcano experts - in a rain of glowing rocks, ash and steam. Nine people died. 
The Galeras tragedy was one of the worst scientific calamities of recent years and passions surrounding the 1993 incident have been simmering ever since. Now they have erupted in an extraordinary public outpouring of bitterness that promises not only to ignite old hostilities but transform the story of Galeras into a Hollywood blockbuster. 
On one side, expedition leader Stanley Williams - who received near-fatal injuries on the volcano - has published his dramatic account, Surviving Galeras . At the same time, US science writer Victoria Bruce has produced No Apparent Danger, alleging that Williams was negligent, ignored key seismological data 
and led his party to their doom. 
'He was like a sailing boat captain who, out of ego, takes his boat into a hurricane and causes the deaths of his crew,' she told The Observer last week. 
Bruce savages Williams - a professor of volcanology at Arizona State University - for repeatedly claiming he was the only survivor of the catastrophe. In fact, six others lived through the eruption. 
It has also been alleged that Williams misappropriated scientific data about volcanoes such as Galeras. 
The current issue of Nature includes a series of antagonistic quotes from several US geologists including one, Bernard Chouet of the US Geological Survey, who simply states that Williams 'ripped me off'. 
For his part, Williams - who did not respond to email or telephone inquiries from The Observer last week - simply told the journal: 'Chouet is not correct.' On the other hand, no matter who wins the propaganda battle over the events on Galeras on 16 January, 1993, neither party is likely to become destitute. Both Bruce and Williams were paid more than $500,000 each for the US rights for their wildly differing accounts of that day. Additional foreign publishing fees are likely to make both of them dollar millionaires. 
In addition, versions of the story are now being touted round Hollywood in the hopes one will be filmed as the logical disaster sequel to The Perfect Storm. Williams, although maligned, may yet appear in the guise of Jeff Bridges or Tim Robbins to the cinema-going public. 
The Galeras expedition was the outcome of a scientific conference in the equatorial city of Pasto, which is perched on the volcano's flanks. Williams agreed to organise a geology workshop leading 12 scientists and three tourists into the volcano. 
Galeras had been seismologically quiet for decades until 1988 when it began to blast out bursts of material. By 1993, the volcano consisted of a mile-wide amphitheatre with a newly created, 450-feet-high cone in its centre. The expedition went to the rim of this cone, and then into its inner lip. 
Only two scientists wore hard hats, Williams recalls in his book. At first, the study trip went well. Then, at precisely 1.41pm, the volcano began to shake, Williams recalls in Surviving Galeras , which is to be published in the UK by Little, Brown in June. 'I turned to run down the scree-covered flank. I had made it only a few yards when the air was rent by a sound like a thunderclap or a sonic boom. Immediately afterward I heard a deafening craaaack, the sound of the Earth's crust snapping.' 
Pressure had been building up under Galeras's dome, and had suddenly burst through. White-hot rocks the size of TV sets were blasted into the air and began raining down on the hapless group. Williams was struck by a rock. 'The blow, just above my left ear, caved in my skull, driving several bone fragments into 
my brain,' he states. Williams staggered down the slope, passing the body of one geologist, Jose Zapata. 'His head was bloody, his body contorted. Not far away, the three tourists were splayed across the field of scree. They too were clearly dead.' 
By this time, Williams had severed a foot and his trousers and jacket were on fire. 'I rolled around to extinguish the flames,' he says. In the end, Williams was rescued - thanks mainly to the bravery of two female geologists, Marta Calvache and Patty Mothes, who had been working not far from the volcano. In addition to Zapata and the tourists, five other members of the party had disappeared without trace, including Geoff Brown, a distinguished UK geologist. 
On the other hand, six other members of the group who visited the cone did survive, though this did not stop Williams from going on to claim on several occasions that he had been the only survivor. 'There were 10 people, and I'm the only one that's alive,' he told NBC's Nightly News . 
Later on, Williams claimed that his sole survivor tag had been pinned on him by newspapers against his will. However, he told Nature last week that he had made a mistake. 'I am sorry,' he told the journal. 
Far more damaging to his reputation is the claim by Bruce that Williams should have known that he was leading his group into severe danger. In his book, he claims that the eruption was 'a hiccup' and that Galeras had behaved 'capriciously'. 
But this is rejected flatly by Bruce - a professional writer with a masters degree in geology - who says that tiny seismic signals, called tornillos, had already been used to predict eruptions on Galeras. 'Seismic data indicating dangerous conditions was available prior to leading an expedition into Galeras, and Williams was aware of that data,' she states. 

*
Sicilian city blanketed in ash 

Tony Gentile in Catania
Monday October 28, 2002


Rivers of boiling lava poured down Mount Etna on Sunday, engulfing small buildings and threatening a mountain lodge after a series of earthquakes awakened Europe's highest and most active volcano. 
Pine trees caught fire almost instantly as the heat of the lava engulfed them and the stench of sulphur filled the air as cracks opened up in the ground, witnesses said. 
Civil protection officials in Catania, Sicily's second-biggest city, which sits in the shadow of Etna, surveyed the mountain by helicopter and were ready to send water-carrying planes into the skies to fight the fires. 
Catania's airport was shut until this morning for safety reasons after a thick blanket of volcanic ash gathered on the runway. But the mayor, Umberto Scapagnini, reassured the city's 330,000 residents that they were in no danger. 
The eruptions began in the early hours of yesterday, after a series of small earthquakes shook the eastern edge of Sicily and parts of mainland Italy. 
Italy's National Institute of Geophysics and Vulcanology said more than 100 tremors measuring 1.1 to 3.5 on the Richter scale struck the region, with the epicentre just one mile south-east of the centre of Etna's crater. 
The 3,350 metre (10,900ft) volcano pumped out huge dark clouds of ash and spurted streams of boiling lava 100 to 200 metres into the air. 
More than 15 hours after the first eruptions an immense mushroom-shaped cloud still hung over the mountain top, and in Catania council workers were sweeping thick layers of ash from the streets. Reuters

*
Lava cuts through Congo town 

Mark Oliver and agencies
Friday January 18, 2002 

A river of lava was today bisecting a Congo town amid reports of 45 deaths following the eruption of a nearby volcano yesterday. 
UN officials estimated dozens of people had died since Mount Nyiragongo sent rivers of lava down through the eastern town of Goma 48km away and into Lake Kivu, on the Rwandan border. 
Goma was mostly abandoned yesterday as hundreds of thousands of residents from the town and local areas fled across the border to Gisenyi town, raising fears of a refugee crisis. 
Today however, Peter Hornsby, a logistics officer for UN peacekeepers in Goma, said: "There is still volcanic activity, but a considerable number of people are coming back into the town." 
He said lava was still flowing into Goma (population around 400,000) and had "cut the town in half", burning a number of wooden houses. "Basically it's cut a swathe 50-60m wide through the town," Mr Hornsby said. 
At least 14 villages north of the town were destroyed by three rivers of lava flowing from Mount Nyiragongo. 
Half of Goma was said to be on fire - blazes which were started when the lava came in contact with gasoline stored in plastic containers in buildings and garages. Local authorities were said to have shot people looting shops as most of the town's population fled across to Rwanda. 
A Rwandan official said as many as 500,000 people may have poured into the area around Gisenyi and that the government was trying to coordinate aid with the Red Cross and the UN refugee agency. 
Adolphe Onusumba, head of Rwandan-backed rebels who control the region around Goma, said there was an urgent need for clean water. "We appeal for help from anyone who can help us with clean water because the lake is deeply polluted by the lava, and it is the main supply of water for the population." 
Many rebel officials had returned to Goma today to assess the damage. 
Christian Aid, which has staff in the region, said the situation was "potentially a huge disaster" and that it had made £50,000 available for relief work. 
The Liberal Democrat's international development spokeswoman, Jenny Tonge, called for Britain to step in and help the victims of "unbelievable suffering". She said: "First they suffered greatly in the civil war and now they are forced to flee their homes by a volcano." 
She called on the Department for International Development (DfID) to obtain information about the area and the aid resources available in surrounding countries like Uganda and Tanzania. 
A spokesman for DfID said: "We are monitoring the situation carefully and assessments are being made. We stand ready to assist." 
Rosamund Carr, an American longtime resident of Gisenyi who lives less than a kilometre from the border, said: "It seemed as though the whole town of Goma left on foot. They were streaming by on the road in front of my house, and at least 50 people slept at my gate." 
Ms Carr, who runs an orphanage, said: "We had no sleep, the children were so frightened, and the flames seemed to be about two yards from the orphanage." 
A Rwandan official, who asked not to be identified, said: "The sky was totally scarlet, there were terrible earthquakes, and one was so bad that there is a crack in the ceiling of my house." 
The UN peacekeeping mission in Congo, MONUC, reported 350 UN staff members had been evacuated by road and by plane from Goma. 
The UN has sent several thousand military observers and peacekeepers into Congo following a cease-fire in the civil war that broke out in Goma in August 1998. 

*
Wave of disaster warning 

Scientists conjure up possibility of volcano triggering world's worst natural calamity 

Tim Radford, science editor
Wednesday August 29, 2001


An eruption of the Cumbre Vieja volcano in the Canary islands could trigger one of the worst disasters ever recorded, British and US scientists warn today. 
A lump of rock twice the volume of the Isle of Man would slide down the unstable western flank of the mountain at more than 200mph and travel up to 40 miles along the sea floor. This would set off the worst tsunami, or giant wave, ever recorded. 
Destructive waves far higher than those generated by the Lisbon earthquake of 1755 could scour British harbours and estuaries, damage power stations, shut down oil refineries and flood low-lying regions. 
There would also be massive damage in Africa, Spain, Portugal and the Canaries themselves. But waves as high as Nelson's column in London, travelling at colossal speed, would crash on to coasts from Canada to Brazil, sweep up to 10 miles inland in low-lying regions and cause trillions of dollars of destruction. 
Wind-driven waves disturb only the top few metres of an ocean. A tsunami involves the entire column of water from surface to seabed. It generates a wave train which accelerates as the ocean gets deeper. Tsunamis characteristically cross the deep ocean at up to 500mph, slowing but building into massive bodies of water as they reach the shallow coastal slopes. 
"Quite often buildings float away, ripped out of their foundations. Oil tanks and gas tanks float away and spread burning oil around the place," said Simon Day of the Benfield Greig geohazard research centre at University College London. 
He and Steven Ward of the University of California report on the dangers of Cumbre Vieja in the September issue of Geophysical Research Letters. They calculate that the avalanche could, in a few seconds, release the equivalent of all the energy used by the US in six months. The resulting "mega-tsunami" would be far more violent than any in recorded history, with turbulent waves repeatedly pounding the coasts most at risk. 
"This is going to impose very large loads on buildings and literally knock buildings over," Dr Day said. "The first wave is going to come in, maybe take out the first few blocks, take the debris away, flatten the ground. The next wave takes out blocks progressively further inland. Over a large part of the area that is inundated, you will be seeing near-total destruction." 
In the past 100 years, around 50,000 people have been swept away by 400 tsunamis generated by earthquakes on the Pacific rim alone. Volcanic collapse is a relatively rare trigger for tsunami destruction - but geophysicists have now identified 11 cases of massive landslides to the ocean floor in the past 200,000 years, in the Hawaiian islands, Cape Verde and the Canary islands. After an eruption in 1949 an ominous fissure appeared in Cumbre Vieja, first evidence of a huge faultline in the massive basalt rock of the mountain, which could one day turn into another landslide. 
Geologists calculate that future discharges of lava will heat the water trapped in the rock. The mass of the rock would act for a while as the lid on a pressure cooker, preventing the water from flashing into steam. But one day, said Dr Day, in some future eruption, the pressure would become too great. He and Dr Ward used a computer program to model what would happen if 500 cubic kilometres of rock slid at 100 metres a second for a distance of nine miles (15 km). They calculated that within 10 minutes a huge tsunami would spread from the ocean region to the west of the island. 
Although the worst waves would race towards the US coasts, menacing New York and low-lying Florida cities, the computer showed destruction threatening most coasts on the Atlantic. 
After an hour the first waves would hit west Africa, and after three hours waves measuring up to 20 metres from crest to trough would have crashed against the coasts of Spain and Portugal. Within six hours a procession of waves measuring 14 metres in total could be racing up the shallows of Ireland and Cornwall. Nine hours on 50 metre-high waves would be closing in on the Florida coast. 
The scientists believe that vulcanologists could have days or even weeks of warning of the collapse. Warning systems would also track the process of the tsunami across the ocean. 
Cumbre Vieja erupts violently at intervals of 22 to 237 years. The last eruption was in 1971. 
"Anyone planning a holiday to the Canary islands, and the islanders themselves, need not panic," said Dr Day. 
"Cumbre Vieja is not erupting, so the short-term and medium-term risks are negligible." 

*
Magma menace 

Archbishop prays for holy protection at Etna 

Rory Carroll in Rome
Monday July 30, 2001


Sicilians gathered on the slopes of Mount Etna to pray last night as a river of orange-black lava oozed towards the mounds of earth protecting a tourist resort. 
A new fissure in the volcano opened earlier as emergency crews, blackened and sweating, battled to reinforce the mounds and divert lava away from Rifugio Sapienza. Mount Etna is Europe's most active volcano and stands at 10,860ft (3,310m). 
The archbishop of Catania, Luigi Bommarito, held a mass on the slopes to ask for God's protection against an eruption that has wrongfooted vulcanologists and threatened the town of Nicolosi further down the slope. According to folklore, the town was saved in 1886 after the local archbishop held a statue of St Anthony before advancing lava. 
Two main fronts sliding down the mountain appeared to have slowed, but the resort's kiosks were still menaced by magma that has consumed a warehouse, car park and ski-lifts, cut a highway in two and showered ash on to Catania's international airport. 
Authorities closed the airport on Saturday for the second time in two weeks, forcing 190 flights to be cancelled. It reopened yesterday after workers had cleared debris from the runway, but explosive booms and smoke from the crater could yet force it to close for a third time. 
Fields and tourism worth £5.7m have gone up in smoke and vulcanologists say the eruption could last several more weeks. Local guides who were born in the mountain's shadow are sceptical of assurances that Nicolosi, with a population of 6,000, is safe. 
"It is a terrible moment. Even our grandfathers can't even remember it being like this," said Giovanni Serafina as lava bubbled less than three miles from the town's houses, many of which were adorned with statues of the Madonna for protection.

*
Rumbles underfoot - then the explosion 

Special report: natural disasters 

Rory Carroll on Mount Etna
Thursday August 2, 2001


The lava slides close enough to touch and for the first time even Marco the fireman hesitates. Rock underfoot softens and warmth seeps through the thickest boot. Everyone scrambles back. 
Marco blasts a fusillade of water but in less than a second it is vapour hissing from the orange-black mass. "It does more good than you think," he shouts. "Cools it a bit." 
The lava oozes over a mound of earth, the last barrier, and it is as if an oven door has swung open. After five hours on Mount Etna the heat is welcome. They don't warn you that it gets cold halfway up an erupting volcano. 
A molten fountain dances in the dusk of a devastated landscape as convoys of bulldozers and trucks wind up from the valley, heaving boulders and technology in the unequal struggle to protect a tourist resort, Rifugio Sapienza. 
A dozen diggers and earth movers are already pounding away, trying to shore up the barrier which was supposed to redirect the lava flow. 
It seems impressive until Etna explodes. Rumbles deep beneath our feet swell into a series of booms and a column of flame and smoke shoots two miles high. Eyes and nostrils fill with ash. 
"Scassau a muntagna!" yells Marco. You don't need to know Sicilian dialect to realise the mountain has cracked again. 
Two weeks after Europe's tallest volcano erupted scientists yesterday said that the pyrotechnics could go on for weeks or months. Such is the build-up of magma and gases that not even six craters have eased the pressure. Two rivers of lava, at temperatures above 1,050C (1,922F), snake down Etna's southern flanks. 
It is like an early Christmas for the scientists, though they remain baffled by Etna's plumbing. One of the two types of lava has not been seen in 15,000 years. 
Lava has breached two barriers and eaten a car park, a warehouse, ski lifts and hectares of fields. It is threatening to overwhelm the third barrier, a seven-metre (20ft) wall of earth. 
Built 70 years ago, Rifugio Sapienza is an undistinguished collection of souvenir shops and hostels huddled around the departure point for ski lifts. But as it sits on the verge of oblivion it has become a symbol of human impotence. 
"We have tried everything possible. We have worked night and day. But the mountain is stronger," Vanni Calli, an engineer, said. 
Franco Barberi, head of the civil protection agency, said his 70 men could be ordered to evacuate at any moment: "The probability of saving the area is less and less." 
Behind him, black skin flaked from a moving mound. Red gleamed beneath. A glimpse of hell straight from Dante, murmured one fireman, exhausted after a 24-hour shift. He urinated and steam hissed. "Can't do any harm." 
The phenomenon which towers more than 3,310 metres (10,860ft) above eastern Sicily has been mythologised for millennia and took its name from the Greek for 'I burn'. 
It has long been famed as a killer which wiped out cities, but some modern scholars reckon put the combined death toll from its ancient eruptions at only 73, just one more than died on Italian roads last weekend. 
"The mountain is good, it is a friend. It reminds us of the immensity of nature. My family has always loved it," said Antonella Ragusa, 33. That the lava was 10 metres from her restaurant, Terrazza del Etna, soured the relationship, she admitted. "At the moment it is not so good. Only God can stop it." 
Madonnas carved from volcanic rock have been placed in front of some shops and the archbishop of Catania held a mass not far away. 
Further down the valley a separate molten river is less than two miles from the town of Nicolosi. However, vulcanologists agree the town is not in danger. 
That is good enough for most locals, who mock the so-called Pompeii syndrome - the fear of being poked at by future generations of archaeologists. They are proud, not afraid, of Etna. 
But the foreign media demands superstition and terror. Some locals furnish quotes about divine retribution and rumours of 500 body bags, then they watch themselves on satellite television and snigger. 
"Of course we're not afraid," Nino Chisari, 58, said. He reckoned the only danger was being run over by the visiting fleet of Land Rovers. 
Much to the surprise of hoteliers the eruptions are drawing more tourists than they repel, prompting pleas for the authorities to allow closer views. 
By last night more trucks were grinding up to Rifugio Sapienza to reinforce the barrier. They were loaded with the one material which may yet save the resort: old lava. 

*
Thousands flee as river of molten rock engulfs villages in Congo 

James Astill in Goma and Owen Bowcott
Saturday January 19, 2002
 

Up to half a million people were fleeing the scorching lava flooding down Mount Nyiragongo in eastern Congo yesterday, as new fissures opened up in the ground and fires spread beyond the regional capital Goma. 
Relief agencies, urging mass evacuations, warned that so much molten rock was pouring into nearby Lake Kivu that huge reserves of methane trapped at the bottom of the lake could well to the surface, suffocating all those in the area. 
Late last night sulphurous clouds of volcanic dust and steam gusted through Goma's deserted streets, lit up neon orange by the river of lava creeping across town to the boiling waters of the lake. 
Few were prepared to estimate casualty figures, although UN reports from the area said at least 45 people were believed to have been killed. Many of those were thought to have been caught by the rapidly advancing lava, which overwhelmed 14 villages near the Rwandan border and caught Goma's inhabitants by surprise. 
On the edge of the lava flow last night, trees lining Goma's boulevards appeared spontaneously to combust, and roofs to disappear in sudden showers of sparks, as they gave way to the intense heat. 
Around 150,000 residents were cut off by the river of lava which bisected the town. A further 250,000 had earlier fled across the Rwandan border after the town's rebel authorities ordered an evacuation. 
International aid workers moved in convoy into Rwanda, to set up operations in Ruhengeri, 35 miles from the border with Congo. 
Witnesses said the lava's advance on the town in the early hours of yesterday morning had been marked by a series of explosions as petrol stations and bootleg fuel stores ignited in the fierce heat of its approach. 
"It was spectacular. Again and again, there were massive explosions and petrol flames to show us how far it had got," said Ron Mininger, an American businessman supplying jet fuel to the 350-strong contingent of UN peacekeepers based in the town. 
After fleeing on Thursday night, Mr Mininger returned yesterday morning to inspect a fuel dump at an airstrip on the edge of town. 
"There was lava oozing around the fuel store. It didn't look like it could last long, so I moved out pretty quick," he said. 
Trader Isaac Kayumba said he had remained in the town until mid-morning yesterday watching the lava bulldoze across his house and warehouse, before turning and running one mile to the Rwandan border post of Gisenyi. 
"I saw it take everything I have worked for: my house, my possessions, my stores. I have only what I am wearing." 
Earlier, rebel police fought gun battles with looters in sight of the lava's creeping advance from fissures at the base of the erupting Mount Nyiragongo. "There were some robberies after the people left, and some fighting," Mr Kayumba said. "I heard five or six shots but I think no one was killed." 
Along the road beyond Gisenyi in Rwanda, 12 miles from Goma, thousands of refugees lay huddled beneath a sky glowing an apocalyptic orange, with violent earth tremors shaking the ground. 
Few appeared to have sal vaged anything from their homes. 
"There's no food and no shelter for them here," said a western aid worker. "All the NGOs have got out. There can't be five aid workers left." 
Rebel officials said last night they had not been able to contact those cut off by the lava since late morning. At the time, townspeople were congregated around the main Hotel Karibu, next to longtime dictator Mobutu Sese Seko's summer palace. 
The officials said those stranded were reluctant to leave the town in the direction open to them, away from the border, for fear of brigands and the tribal militias who roam the volcanic plains there. 
As much as 80% of the city's infrastructure was said to have been destroyed by the encroaching flames. The airport was cut in two by one of the flows. 
"We're suffocating in this town, the smoke is killing us," Stephen, 25, told Reuters as he loaded furniture into the back of a van parked in Goma's main street, just 20 metres from the black wall of lava. 
"We're just trying to save what little we can." 
The scale of volcanic activity showed no sign of easing yesterday. A kilometre-long crack appeared in the earth and fresh eruptions were heard. Seismic monitors recorded sustained underground activity every five minutes, according to the UN humanitarian relief agency, OCHA. 
Gisenyi was also threatened by lava flows and disaster coordinators were considering whether they should order an evacuation. 
More than 2.5m people are thought to have died in the long-running civil war which has seen Congo divided between rival factions. The volcanic explosions are expected to further depress the country's weakened economy. 
The foreign secretary, Jack Straw, is due to begin a visit to the country on Monday, as part of a long-planned tour of the region with his French counterpart, Hubert Védrine. 
The main purpose is to urge an end to the civil war. "We will of course be seeing what the international community can do to help [in this disaster]," Mr Straw said yesterday. 
The area has been plagued by violent explosions in the past, with lava flows reaching 40 mph. A nearby volcano exploded in 1996. 
Sue Loughlin, a geologist at the British Geological Survey, said scientists had been monitoring Nyiragongo for weeks. The volcano has a deep summit crater that fills up with lava intermittently. 
"When the crater fills up very close to the rim it can get out through fissures. This happened in 1977," she said, adding that something similar had probably occurred this week. 
Oxfam said it hoped to fly emergency aid to the Rwandan border area today. Some of the lava flows were said to be 100 metres wide, according to Rob Wilkinson, Oxfam's regional coordinator based in Kigali. 
Many of the refugees, he said, had fled towards Masisi, deep in Congo. 
"When the first eruption occurred it didn't seem so bad. But they were caught out by a much larger second explosion."

*
Scientists get close-up of Io 

Guardian staff and agencies
Tuesday October 26, 1999 

Scientists on Friday got their closest look ever at Jupiter's moon Io, believed to be the solar system's most volcanic body, as the spacecraft Galileo sent back pictures of spectacular lava flow it photographed during its Oct. 10 fly-by. 
True to form, Io produced pictures of an extraordinary lava flow from an erupting volcano as Galileo came within 417 miles (671 kms) on the closest approach yet to the Jovian moon. 
Scientists at the National Aeronautics and Space Administration's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena said the image of Io was 50 times better than the previous best pictures, taken in 1979 by the Voyager spacecraft. 
"Visible in the image are new lava flows from the volcanic centre named Pillan, an area with erupting lava hotter than any known eruption that ever occurred on Earth within billions of years," said JPL spokeswoman Jane Platt. Nasa believes Io is the most volcanic body in the solar system. 
She added that scientists were studying the lava flow to determine the characteristics of the volcanic eruption and were eagerly awaiting more images and data due to be sent back to earth over the coming weeks. 
Galileo's approach to Io, the closest yet, was a calculated risk because the moon's orbit lies in a dense part of Jupiter's radiation belt, but it came through relatively unscathed, although slightly bruised, JPL said. 
The biggest bruising, said Galileo Project Manager Jim Erickson, was inflicted on the craft's "fast camera," which pre-processes the image to average the brightness of varying parts of the picture - much like a sophisticated automatic camera on earth. 
But Jupiter's radiation affected the camera's ability, resulting in poor pictures. 
"Fortunately, images that were taken in other camera modes apparently did not suffer ill effects from the radiation," Platt said. It was one of those images that Nasa scientists received from the spacecraft on Friday. 
Galileo's original mission was to spend two years studying Jupiter and its moons. Although it officially ended in 1997 it had been so successful, and the craft remained so healthy, that the mission was extended for two years. 
But mindful of the radiation dangers around Io, Nasa waited until the end of Galileo's extended mission to schedule the two fly-bys of the moon. The second will take place on Nov. 25 when Galileo is scheduled to come within 186 miles (300 kms) of Io's volcano-scarred surface. The image of Io being studied is available on Nasa's JPL website 

*
Fireball kills 100 in stricken Goma 

James Astill in Goma
Thursday January 24, 2002
 

About 100 looters in Goma, the eastern capital of the Democratic Republic of Congo devastated by the erupting Mount Nyiragongo volcano, died in a huge explosion on Monday when petrol was spilt on molten lava and ignited fuel tanks. 
Five days after the eruption began, making half a million homeless and forcing thousands to flee, soldiers of the rebel group that controls eastern Congo, the Rassemblement Congolais pour la Démocratie (RCD), fired on youths looting burnt-out buildings beneath the 60m fireball caused by the petrol station blast. 
The interior minister in neighbouring Rwanda said the volcano had erupted again on Sunday, and called on Goma's 500,000 residents to evacuate for a second time. "Last night there was a new eruption on the north side of Nyiragongo. We recognise a great risk. There were many vibrations last night," said Jean de Dieu Ntiruhungwa. 
However, describing the eruption as "a minor spillage", the Congolese vulcanologist Dieudonné Wafula said further flows of lava were unlikely. 
Goma's residents have been starting to rebuild. Most had been given access to piped water by early Monday, in an effort to prevent a cholera epidemic. But the water was being pumped directly from nearby Lake Kivu, which contains traces of the cholera that killed 50,000 Rwandan Hutu refugees after the 1994 genocide. "We have several confirmed cases, but the town is picking up incredibly fast and the threat is diminishing," said Monica Castellarnau of the charity Médecins Sans Frontières, "though we won't know if there's going to be a full-blown epidemic until after a week." 
Dieudonné Mabutua, 15, was one of 16 survivors from the crowd of adults and children who on Monday rushed on the Mama Fifi petrol station, half-buried by the main lava flow. He siphoned fuel from below the black crust, then walked away as a fight broke out over whose turn was next. It is almost certain that petrol was spilt as a result. "There were more than 100 people there. All my friends," said Dieudonné, shivering. 
The relief effort was complicated by regional politics. The RCD split responsibility for Goma with its Rwandan sponsors. RCD soldiers patrolled west of the lava flow while to the east were mostly Rwandans. 
The shooting was all on the west side, cut off from aid arriving through Rwanda. Next to hundreds of burns victims in Goma's hospital were several with gunshot wounds. 
According to the RCD's secretary- general, Azarias Ruberwa, the soldiers were firing into the air to protect people. But a Rwandan lieutenant said: "They appear to be shooting to kill thieves." 
Aid agencies said serious shortages of food existed, yet the United Nations, wrongfooted last Sunday when refugees left its camps in Rwanda and returned to Goma, refused to distribute aid in the town. "We are not moving to Goma when there is a risk of eruptions," said Laura Melo, spokeswoman for the World Food Programme. 
Ms Melo said 40,000 of an initial 350,000 refugees from Goma were still in Rwanda. 

*
Philippines prepares for avalanche 

John Aglionby, south-east Asia correspondent
Tuesday September 4, 2001

Philippine disaster prevention teams are scrambling to evacuate tens of thousands of people in the next two days from the slopes of a volcano rapidly filling with water, after local labourers botched an attempt to control the overflow. 
Non-governmental organisations coordinated by Oxfam accuse the local authorities around Mount Pinatubo of negligence and being poorly prepared. 
They say that if the workers preparing a canal to divert the overspill had been properly supervised, the lake in Pinatubo's crater would not have breached the rim for at least another two weeks. 
But instead, in an attempt to retain a modicum of control over the expected avalanche of water, mud and rocks, the authorities in the municipality of Botolan are having to breach the crater rim on Thursday morning. This leaves them only two days to evacuate 46,000 people from the 18 villages most at risk. 
"We will force everyone to leave even if they don't want to," the mayor, Roger Yap, said. "I will have to answer if anything happens to them." 
Residents of nine other villages will be given a stockpile of supplies in case they are cut off. 
At worst, 60m cubic metres of water could overflow, mixing with mud and rock to create an avalanche of 300m cubic metres of slurry which could reach the town of Botolan, 25 miles away. 
The emergency precautions began when the water level rose to within about 80cm of the lowest point on the rim yesterday, compared with 1.5 metres on Friday. 
Five weeks ago it was more than 4.5 metres. 
Paul Del Rosario, the Oxfam official on the scene, said: "The indigenous people that were asked to work there [on the canal] were not properly supervised. They thought they were doing a good job, but they were wrong." 
Some of the workers are reported to have said that their supervisors remained on the other side of the crater. 
Oxfam's project team leader, Rosalito Alonso, said it was "pretty obvious" that qualified engineers had not adequately monitored the work. 
"If the diggers had been properly supervised, then they would not have forgotten to leave a big plug in place." 
He said the plug left between the canal and the crater rim should have been several metres thick but it ended up only a fraction of that. 
Oxfam's country director, Lan Mercado, said: "There was definitely negligence. There's no other way to describe it." 
The authorities deny that anything is amiss. Raymundo Punongbayan, head of the national vulcanology institute, said they were operating in unknown territory. 
"An intervention like has not been done in the Philippines before. I don't know if this has been done anywhere in the world." 
Ramon Lacbain, the provincial vice-governor, blamed the weather. 
"It has been much wetter this year than was forecast. This means the water will be harder to control and so we are taking extra precautions and evacuating more people." 
But Botolan councillors complained at the weekend that experts from the institute had said last week that they had at least three weeks to prepare. 
"They've now left us with only a few days," one was quoted as saying. 
More than 800 people died, mostly from diseases in overcrowded evacuation centres, when the 1,422-metre (4,667ft) volcano last erupted, in 1991. 

*
Saturday July 7, 2001
The Guardian 

Surviving Galeras
Stanley Williams
(Little, Brown, £16.99) 
If you've ever idly wondered what it's like to have a volcano erupt beneath your feet, you're in luck. In 1993, vulcanologist Williams was mooching around on top of the Colombian volcano Galeras with friends and colleagues when all hell broke loose. He was hit by fiery rocks travelling faster than bullets; others were killed. The central chapters on the eruption and Williams's subsequent rescue are gripping stuff; the rest of the book is a more sober account of fieldwork and a scoot through volcanic history. The dustjacket rather wishfully compares the book to Jon Krakauer's superb Into Thin Air, an account of an Everest expedition that went wrong. Good though this is, Williams doesn't have Krakauer's iron literary fist. 

*
Mayon erupts 

Thousands evacuated in Philippines 

John Aglionby, south-east Asia correspondent
Monday June 25, 2001


More than 20,000 Filipinos living in the shadow of the volcano Mt Mayon fled their homes yesterday after it began belching truck-sized lumps of rock, molten lava and a 9.5-mile high mushroom cloud of ash. 
A 900C river of fire travelling at up to 60mph threatened to incinerate nine villages but caused no direct casualties, because people had been on the alert since January, when the 2,474-metre (8,118ft) mountain began rumbling. 
The only recorded fatalities were a woman who died of a heart attack and a man fleeing on a bicycle who was hit by a speeding rescue vehicle. Another woman was so shocked she gave birth prematurely. 
The local authorities raised the alert status in the farming region 200 miles south-east of Manila to the maximum, meaning eruption in progress, yesterday morning. 
The the volcano shook the region on Saturday night, and began spewing lava. The first big explosion was just before 1pm yesterday. People in towns up to eight miles away could feel the rumbling. 
Priests rang church bells and village officials used megaphones and sirens to rouse thousands sleeping in the path of the lava flows. Oblivious of the danger, children watched the glowing lava cascading down the mountain as their parents packed what belongings they could carry. 
Raymundo Punongbayan, head of the Philippines Institute of Vulcanology and Seismology, said the eruption was likely to last one to two weeks. The local authorities said up to 60,000 people might have to be evacuated. 
Mt Mayon, which last exploded 16 months ago, has erupted at least 48 times since the first recorded activity in 1616. In 1814, 1,200 people were killed and a whole town was buried under volcanic mud.

*
Galeras tragedy 

Sunday April 1, 2001


As the wife of the late Professor Geoff Brown, the UK geologist killed during the eruption of Galeras volcano, Colombia, in January 1993, I am distressed at the content of your article 'Fatal volcano trip row boils over' (News, last week). 
As a geologist myself, I am confident that what happened on 14 January 1993 (not 16 January, as your article states) was a tragic accident that could not have been predicted at that time. Trying to apportion blame is unproductive, distressing to both the survivors of the eruption and the relatives of those who died, and symptomatic of a society that prefers to seek scapegoats rather than accept responsibility for its own actions. 
Evelyn Brown 
Loughborough, Leics 

*
Our choice 

Dee O'Connell
Sunday July 9, 2000


Hiking for lava lovers 
Mount Etna in Sicily continues to be active, which will suit those thrill seekers who want to be at the centre of the action. Explore Worldwide have organised a number of volcano hikes to the edge of the action, if not the centre of it. You can travel from Heathrow or join the seven-night tour in Catania for some moderate to strenuous hiking. Travellers climb Vulcano on the second day to sample the volcanic gases and the healthier mudbaths at the base. The ascent of the second volcano, Stromboli, is timed so that climbers reach the top at sundown when the flying sparks and incandescent lava appear at their most dramatic. The culmination of the trip is a day-long walk to the summit craters of Mount Etna. Accommodation is in local hotels and transport between the volcanic islands is by ferry. Prices start at £699 including flights. Phone 01252 760000. 

*
Letting off steam 

Japanese resorts evacuated as volcano threatens to blow 

Jonathan Watts in Tokyo
Thursday March 30, 2000


Thousands of people abandoned their homes in northern Japan yesterday after experts put out the alert that a volcano could be about to erupt. 
In the past few days, the area around Mount Usu, a 732m peak in Hokkaido, has been rocked by more than 40 earthquakes an hour. 
Yesterday, they grew sharply in frequency and intensity - the biggest tremor registered 4.2 on the Richter scale - prompting vulcanologists to warn that the mountain could be about to blow. 
"It is highly likely that an eruption will occur in the next few days," the government's coordinating committee for prediction of volcanic eruption declared in an emergency announcement. 
Scenic hot-spring resorts at the foot of the mountain were evacuated of more than 8,000 residents. Many abandoned their homes with only a handful of belongings when municipal officials advised them to leave behind all but money, a change of clothes and other essentials. 
As well as laying on buses to collect the elderly and bedridden, the authorities put 3,300 troops on standby in case the evacuation area had to be expanded. Within hours, streets, hospitals wards and classrooms in the initial area were left empty. 
"It could erupt in a week or any second now so we are asking people to leave all the most dangerous places as soon as possible," said Hiromi Hiraguchi of the local Date council. 
Yoshiaki Ida, head of the eruption prediction committee, warned that Mount Usu could produce the same deadly flow of superheated gas and ash that killed 43 people when Mount Fugen erupted in southern Japan in 1991. 
Even if there are no pyro clastic flows, made up of rocks, volcanic ash and gas, residents face the threat of mudslides and avalanches caused by tremors and snow melting as the mountain's temperature rises. 
When Mount Usu last erupted, in 1978, three people were killed when mudslides buried them. Vulcanologists said that at this mountain, such eruptions happened every 20 to 30 years. 
Many evacuees spent last night in emergency shelters at municipal gymnasiums and halls. 
"I wasn't able to sleep a wink on Tuesday," said one woman, 85. "This morning, the earthquakes made the building squeak, which was frightening." 
A task force has been set up in the prime minister's office to coordinate disaster measures in the event of an eruption, and troops have prepared food, water and blankets for tens of thousands of people in case a wider evacuation becomes necessary. 
Mount Usu's slopes are now deserted, except for a handful of scientists preparing monitoring equipment, and troops on surveillance missions.

*
Asian volcano 'changed Britain's cultural map' 

Monday July 26, 1999


The separate identities of England and Wales are the result of a massive volcanic explosion in South-East Asia in the 6th century, according to a TV documentary. 
The explosion caused a devastating change to the global climate which triggered an outbreak of disease that changed the course of history. 
Channel 4's two-part documentary Secrets of the Dead - to be screened tomorrow - claims ancient civilisations were destroyed. 
It is based on a book Catastrophe, an Investigation into the Origins of the Modern World by historian David Keys who claims western Britain - like many other countries - was devastated by a killer disease triggered by a huge volcanic explosion in Indonesia in 535 AD. 
The eruption, which lasted several weeks, darkened the sky with dust and debris and blocked out the sun for 18 months. It destabilised world climate, distorted the world's ecology and triggered the first known outbreak of bubonic plague, the rat and flea-borne disease. 
The catastrophe led to the birth of many nations, including Ireland, France, Spain, England and Wales, says Mr Keys. 
"Before the plague the Celtic British controlled all of western Britain so there was no cultural difference between Wales and the West Midlands or between Wales and the Cotswolds. 
"But the plague so decimated the Celtic British that it created a partial population vacuum which allowed the embryonic English - the Anglo Saxons - to migrate westwards. 
"They pushed on as far as the Welsh uplands - and stopped. Early England was thus formed - and Wales was cut off from Cornish Britain and from the British of the north-west. 
"Thus it is as a direct result of the plague - and the volcano that ultimately triggered it - that England was born and the borders of Wales were determined. 
"England and Wales as a cultural entity are therefore products of the catastrophe of the 6th century." 
He claims the demise of important towns such as Wroxeter - a Roman town in Shropshire - around that time could have been the result of the plague. 
Drawing on new interpretations of data from tree rings and lake sediments, Mr Keys suggests that the volcanic explosion was far bigger than anything in the past 1,500 years. 

*
Scientists sound a warning as Etna goes on the boil again 

Robin McKie, science editor
Sunday August 27, 2000


Mount Etna - the realm of Vulcan, god of fire, and the Cyclops - may be entering a new cycle of catastrophic eruptions, say scientists. 
In the past few weeks, vulcanologists noted intensifying pattern fissures, and lava pouring from its 11,000ft peak, on the east coast of Sicily. 
Nearby towns have been coated with volcanic dust, roads need constant clearing from ash that has settled over the area, which the local government has declared an emergency zone. 
'There was a similar pattern of activity in 1978 and 1979, shortly before Etna produced some powerful flank eruptions that destroyed buildings, roads, vineyards and orchards,' said vulcanologist Dr John Murray, from the Open University. 'I think the same thing is set to happen again.' 
It is unlikely that Etna will produce a cataclysmic eruption like those that have typified its northerly counterpart, Vesuvius. Nevertheless, it can leak sudden streams of rapidly moving lava. One, in 1928, completely destroyed the town of Mascali. 'All volcanoes have their own distinctive way of behaving,' said Murray, who has been studying Etna for the past 30 years. 'They have different personalities. Etna has a very leaky one. It grumbles along in almost permanent activity, occasionally producing flank eruptions in which lava bursts from fissures low down its slopes. 
'When that happens, you have to move very quickly. The lava comes out under pressure and moves very rapidly. 
'Villagers can get cut off very easily, though none have been killed in recent times.' In fact, all fatalities on Etna have been tourists. In 1979, nine were killed during a visit to one of its summit cones when it produced a massive eruption, the entire party was overwhelmed by the volcano's hot ash. 

*
Three minutes of horror when 30,000 perished 

100 years after: The world's worst volcano disaster 

Robin McKie, science editor
Sunday April 28, 2002


First came waves of yellow ants and large, black centipedes. They scrabbled down the scrub-covered slopes of Martinique's Mount Pelée, scuttled over roads and tracks, and attacked workers in nearby cane fields. They even invaded the local landowner's house. 
Then the snakes began their exodus. Hundreds, including deadly pit vipers, twisted and writhed down the volcano's flanks and headed across the countryside. It could have been a biblical plague. 
Finally, at 8am on 8 May 1902, Mount Pelée blew its top, sending a massive cloud of incandescent gas hurtling down its flanks. Travelling at more than 100mph, it struck St Pierre at 8.02am. 
Three minutes later, the 'Paris of the West Indies' lay in ruins, its 30,000 inhabitants suffocated and burnt. Only one person survived: Auguste Ciparis, the sole occupant of the city's dungeon. 
The destruction of St Pierre was complete, and unprecedented. The cause, scientists now know, was a nuée ardente (glowing cloud) or pyroclastic flow - a mixture of gas, steam, glowing dust, ash and pumice. It was the first time such an event had been observed, however. 
Since then scientists have learnt much about these deadly eruptions and have established how to predict volcanic behaviour with precision. Yet as researchers prepare to mark the centenary of history's worst volcanic disaster, many now fear that this knowledge could prove useless and that future eruptions could have even more devastating effects on humanity. 
'There are more than 3,000 volcanoes in the world, and only about 150 are being monitored,' said Professor Bill McGuire, a volcanologist at University College London. 'There are also so many more people alive today and that makes us more, not less, vulnerable to eruptions in the twenty-first century. 
'And although we can predict eruptions, we cannot force politicians to take action and be ready to implement expensive evacuation plans. 
'For instance, around Vesuvius in Italy, a million people would be under threat the next time it erupts, so poor are local evacuation plans. Very few people seem to understand the danger we still face.' 
Such complacency mir rors how local authorities ignored the dangers of Mount Pelée. Apart from visitations by escaping insects and snakes, major earth tremors and mud flows had killed several inhabitants by the end of April 1902. 
Yet municipal leaders refused to act. The island was in the midst of general elections, with socialists poised to take control from right-wing politicians. However, St Pierre was the main centre of conservative votes, and so the governor, keen to keep his right-wing colleagues in power, put off evacuation until polling day on 11 May. 
The horrific consequences of this delay were described by Charles Thompson, assistant purser of the steamship Roraima which was moored in St Pierre. 'The fire rolled down upon St Pierre,' he recalled. 'The town vanished before our eyes.' 
Another ship, the Rod ham, managed to sail out of the harbour as pumice and ash rained on its deck. It headed for St Lucia, most of its crew dead or dying. The Rodham was met by stunned customs officials who asked the survivors of the scorched ship where it had come from. 'From the gates of hell,' came the captain's answer. 
'Two other volcanic eruptions have had worse death tolls - Krakatoa in 1883, which killed 36,000, and Tambora, in 1815, which killed 92,000,' said McGuire, whose book, A Guide to the End of the World (OUP), has just been published. 
'But many of these deaths were caused by secondary effects. Tambora destroyed rice fields throughout the Dutch East Indies and people starved to death, while Krakatoa triggered a tsunami, a massive tidal wave that led to the drowning of most of its victims. However, Mount Pelée was the direct cause of its victims' deaths.' 
But the effects of Pelée's eruption went beyond killing people in its neighbourhood. Its impact is still felt today, as Jelle Zeilinga de Boer and Donald Theodore Sanders point out in Volcanoes in Human History (Princeton). 
In 1902, the United States was preparing to fund a canal to connect the Pacific and Atlantic oceans, either through Panama or through Nicaragua. 
Nicaragua was known for its volcanic activity and, after the destruction of St Pierre, the prospect of another major eruption damaging the canal was enough to persuade the US Senate to approve the Panama project by eight votes. 
As for Auguste Ciparis, after surviving four days in his cell, which was buried beneath layers of ash, his sentence (for assault) was suspended and he spent the rest of his days touring with the Barnum and Bailey Circus - as an exhibit in a replica of his prison cell. 
· Additional research by Hannah Richards


<#LDT>
*
Saturday, July 27, 2002, p. 20
Congo hit by second eruption
Adrian Blomfield in Nairobi
THE skies over the Congolese town of Goma glowed an ominous red yesterday after Africa's most active volcano began throwing lava 300 feet into the air, seven months after its sister mountain entombed parts of the city in molten rock.
Scientists said Goma's 500,000 inhabitants were not under any immediate threat after Mt Nyamuragira, 25 miles from the town, began erupting, sending two rivers of boiling magma through the Virungas National Park, home of the mountain gorilla.
"The main danger is the northern flow," said Kasereka Mahinda, the senior seismologist at the Goma Volcanological Observatory, who toured the volcano by helicopter.
"The lava flow is very fast and the danger is that if it continues at this speed it will cross the main road and cut off many outlying villages. But there is no danger to Goma itself."
The United Nations warned that several thousand people might have to flee as the lava advanced through the countryside.
Lava from Mt Nyiragongo, a linked volcano, has buried much of Congo's fourth largest town under millions of tons of rock, and scientists fear it might erupt again soon.
The Worldwide Fund for Nature said it believed that the mountain gorilla population in the Virungas was safe although there was some concern about some of the park's chimpanzees.

*
Monday, July 15, 2002, p. 25
Volcano's Velcro effect offers help for hangovers
Rosie Murray-West
A HEALTHCARE company is seeking funds to develop a volcanic mineral that it believes could treat cancer, remove pests from your pets . . . and cure your hangover.
This magic elixir is called zeolite, and Global Health Products (GHP) wants to sell packs of it in pubs and clubs as a hangover treatment, before starting clinical trials on the substance.
"If you drink alcohol and take six capsules of this, then basically you could drink four to five pints," said Dr Kenneth Maule, director of GHP. "It won't stop you from getting drunk but I can guarantee you won't suffer from that morning-after feeling."
The company wants to raise pounds 250,000 to start marketing the mineral, which Dr Maule says has been used as a traditional detoxifying treatment for many years. It aims to raise money through a private placing of redeemable convertible loan notes and warrants. Its bankers are HSBC, and its accountants are BDO Stoy Hayward.
"In Malaysia it is used for farming and to feed animals," said Dr Maule. "If you go to a volcano and there are any pools of water, animals that drink from that water will be healthier than ordinary animals."
He added that, after the Chernobyl disaster, Bulgarian communities were using Clinoptilolite, this particular form of zeolite, to deradiate people. "They would make it into rusks for children who wouldn't take tablets," he said.
The substance basically acts "like Velcro" and attaches itself to the toxins that make you ill. "You urinate away the cause of a hangover," Dr Maule said.
In terms of cancer treatment, he said it had immense potential to contain the after-effects of chemotherapy by "mopping up" excess toxins left in the body.
In the same way, it could stop multiple sclerosis patients going blind by eliminating the toxins that cause this.
Dr Maule said the mineral would be marketed as Zetox as a hangover cure, and that GHP is currently applying for a patent. The company is entering into a joint venture with True North Partners to develop the mineral for cancer treatment.
It will also be marketed under the name Adzorb as a treatment for parisitic infections in domestic animals.

*
Sunday, April 21, 2002, p. 14
An Englishwoman abroad.
Looking into the volcano's chasm.
LINDSAY HAWDON
Antonio walks ahead of me. He is small, polite and shy. "You are ok?" he keeps turning around to ask me as we climb the path that leads up to Guatemala's active Pacaya volcano. Around us are fields of beans and corn. Cows graze in the distance and the only sound is of chickens squawking. Antonio comes from a family of seven who live in a small village beneath the volcano. He watched the lava flows heading down the valley towards his village three years ago. "Was it beautiful?" I ask.
"Yes," he nods. "It was beautiful - but frightening." The volcano has been erupting almost continuously since the 1960s. His parents abandoned the village during the 1976 eruption, returning to find their house full of volcanic ash.
We reach 5,000ft. The path twists through a forest of pines and cypresses, the ground dotted with the yellow of wild flowers. The smell of damp leaves becomes sharper as we climb. In time, mist creeps across the path, dampening my hair and my clothes.
At almost 7,000ft the trees end and the ground opens out into a rocky upland of pale green grass. The clouds sweep across it in bands, great patches of land disappearing in the fog. My feet crunch over fine black volcanic sand. I am breathing heavily in the thin air.
"We are almost there," Antonio says. But I can see nothing except clouds. They close in again, and as we crunch across the ridge only whiteness surrounds us. I can't tell how far the ground drops away beneath me, nor how far it climbs above. There is just this black volcanic path and the clouds.
"We are in heaven, yes," Antonio says with a grin. But as he says it the clouds to my right thin and my eye catches a huge dark shadow looming above me. It is a deep black against the white of the sky, stretching way above us. "There it is," whispers Antonio.
"When did it last erupt?" I ask.
"A month ago," he replies, walking briskly onwards.
I stare up at the vast slope we have to climb. We begin, slipping and sliding as small rocks give way beneath each step. It's two steps upwards, one down, but we struggle on, scrambling upwards. Much of the time I am on my hands and knees. 
The rock feels warm to the touch. Around us the only sounds are the wind and the crunching of our feet.
"You are ok?" Antonio asks, clambering ahead of me. I nod. Head down, I don't realise we've reached the top until the ground suddenly flattens out at the crater's rim and the rocks become patched with a vivid residue of red, yellow and blue.
I stand straight and look around me. Huge clouds billow up, their grey tinged with a dirty orange hue. "It's the sulphur," Antonio explains, and as he does so a great wall of mist hits us and there's a stench that reminds me of a school chemistry lab. It leaves me coughing and my eyes
watering.
When the cloud clears, the crater is suddenly before me, a steep drop into nothingness, appearing and disappearing as the clouds blow back and forth. I peer over the edge and feel that strange dizziness that comes with knowing that death is merely a step away. If I took it I would drop into the red hot lava. I can feel the heat of the rocks rising through my boots. The fumes burn the back of my throat and when I look up the sun is a red ball behind the sulphurous clouds, a perfect circle of vermilion.
When we leave, Antonio and I almost sprint down the steep volcanic slope, our feet sinking into the scree, steadying our steps. It's like a fairground ride, a breeze in comparison with the ascent.
I grin all the way down. The view spins past me and the sun peeks out from the clouds, yellow once again, warm on my skin, as I run back towards the green land below.
Trips Worldwide (0117 311 4400; www.tripsworldwide.co.uk) is a specialist in trips to Guatemala and the rest of Latin and Central Latin America. Further information on Guatemala from the Guatemalan Tourist Board (020 7349 0346: www.guatemala.travel.com.gt).

*
Saturday, March 2, 2002, p. 31
Catch this
Rosemary Behan
France's latest tourist extravaganza, a scientific theme park dedicated to volcanoes, opened in the mountains of the Auvergne last week, 10 years after it was conceived by the country's former president Valery Giscard d'Estaing.
Situated 10 miles from the city of Clermont-Ferrand in central France, Vulcania is built on a 140-acre former military base at the heart of the chain of extinct volcanoes that is the region's principal attraction.
The 100-million-euro ( pounds 62 million) project aims to provide an "educational and recreational journey into volcanoes and earth science". 
Two-thirds of the site - which is crowned by a 100ft artificial cone - is underground.
Visitors descend through a massive crater before enjoying a variety of simulations and visual presentations. There is a volcanic garden and a vibrating cinema with one of the world's largest projectors. The "Rumbling Gallery" recreates the sounds of the inside of a volcano.
Guides accompany tours of the interior and exterior of the building. There is also an information centre, with more than 2,500 works on volcanology and earth sciences, plus three restaurants and a bookshop.
Vulcania, Rte de Mazayes, 63230 Saint Ours, Auvergne, France (00334 73 19 70 00, www.vulcania.com). Admission costs pounds 11.25 adults and pounds 7.50 children. Open 10am-6pm Wednesday-Sunday February-May and September-November, and 9am-7pm daily in summer.

*
January 24, 2002, p. 03
Gorillas emerge from the volcanic mist. Earthquakes, war, eruptions . . . nothing seems to shake mountain giants, writes Tim Butcher
Tim Butcher
IF MUNANE, one of the world's few surviving wild mountain gorillas, was bothered by the helicopter passing overhead yesterday to deliver aid to victims of central Africa's volcanic eruption he did not show it.
Ignoring the clatter he lifted his 700lb bulk on to his legs, placed his face against a cliff and began teasing tasty insect larvae from the soggy moss with his tongue.
"It is amazing but they have never seen or heard a helicopter before but they don't seem to mind," Franois, a Rwandan mountain guide, said.
After surviving a decade of war, earthquakes and a resurgence of poaching, the mountain gorillas reacted to the volcano eruption as they have to every other emergency in recent years, by disappearing into the mist.
"They are used to the earthquakes living in this region but last week's eruption was followed by many, many tremors," Franois said.
"It did not bother them but the other animals in the mountain range did not like it.
"Elephants and buffalo from the Congo side of the mountain were scared over this side but the gorillas stay on the steep cliffs and among the trees so there was no problem."
The Virunga volcano range, straddling the borders of Rwanda, Uganda and the Democratic Republic of Congo, is one of the few remaining natural habitats for the increasingly rare mountain gorilla.
The last census, now 10 years out of date, estimated there were only 650 left in the world, of which about 300 are in the Rwandan sector of the range.
It was here that Dian Fossey, the American scientist, carried out pioneering research on the mountain gorilla, a story told by Hollywood in the film Gorillas in the Mist.
Nyiragongo, the volcano that devastated the Congolese town of Goma last week, forms the southernmost end of the Virunga range and while the lava flows came nowhere near the gorilla habitats the tremors certainly did.
As Rwanda's growing population demands more agricultural land the gorillas of the park are pushed further up towards the mist of the volcano summits. Two gorillas were killed in recent months by poachers who were widely believed to be diehards from the interahamwe, the Hutu extremist militia responsible for the bulk of the massacres of Tutsis and moderate Hutus in the 1994 genocide. This was the first time any had been poached in years.
The fear in Goma is that the interahamwe, who have been operating in the jungle since 1993, may be pushed further into the gorillas' habitat, endangering them more.
As for Munane, he took noisy exception to a small group of humans sweating their way through the mat of jungle undergrowth yesterday. He lifted his huge head above the dense foliage and beat his chest with vigour.
The dense jungle of the Virunga chain soon returned to silence, broken only by the screech of birds and the grunts of Munane, a silverback, and his nine-strong family group on their daily search for food. Through the dense undergrowth the adults trooped, dragging vines out of trees, stripping leaves from branches, and teaching their young the ways of the mountain gorilla world.
One young gorilla tried to copy his larvae-sucking leader, leaning up against the cliff face next to Munane and for a second looking like a human child trying to impress his father through imitation. Then they disappeared into the jungle.

*
Wednesday, January 23, 2002, p. 17
Hundreds of volcano children left alone
Adrian Blomfield in Nkamira refugee camp
AS AID groups struggled yesterday to deliver aid to the Congolese town of Goma, attention shifted to hundreds, possibly thousands of children separated from their families after the eruption of Mt Nyiragongo last week.
Terrified and alone, Miriam Marta, 11, was one of the last people to leave Goma alive, fleeing just before her house was engulfed by boiling lava.
She had been sent by her mother to pay a bill on the other side of the town, but as she headed home, red-hot rivers of lava were silently seeping through the outskirts.
Tens of thousands of people ran from their homes in her direction. Bewildered, Miriam forced her frail figure through the tide of humanity.
"I was pushing though people for a long, long time," she said, shivering as mist enveloped the refugee camp high on a Rwandan hill which is now her home. "I kept getting pushed over. People were shouting at me and I felt dizzy. I was scared I would never get home."
When Miriam finally pushed open the front door of her house, she found it empty. 
Clothes and other possessions lay scattered on the floor.
Miriam sat on her bed and waited, sure that her parents would return for her. The clamour outside ebbed and it became eerily quiet. "I felt a lot of smoke," she said. "My ears and eyes started to hurt. It was very hot. When I went outside everything was as though it was burning. There was a noise like thunder. 
I ran and ran until I got to the border."
Miriam walked the streets of neighbouring Gisenyi, on the Rwandan side of the border, for four days, looking for her parents among the hordes of refugees.She ate nothing and drank from the lava-poisoned water of Lake Kivu.
She had collapsed when aid workers found her and took her to the Nkamira refugee camp, 25 miles away. In two small tents, more than 100 children in a similar predicament sit forlornly, waiting for their parents.
Many were separated in the confusion of the flight, others had been playing some distance from their homes.
Food supplies were distributed by the United Nations for the first time yesterday to volcano victims on the Congolese side of the border, although many in Goma spent a fifth day without eating.
The UN said it would start distributing in the town today after it completed a registration exercise. Food was handed out in Saki, 15 miles west of Goma, to thousands of refugees who queued patiently in driving rain.
The UN voiced concern about the possibility of further earthquakes.

*
Wednesday, January 23, 2002, p. 17
Expert with a perfect prediction of disaster
Tim Butcher, flying over Mt Nyiragongo
PRESSING his face against the helicopter window yesterday for the best possible view of Mt Nyiragongo's smoking summit, the local vulcanologist, Dieudonne Wafula, was too well-mannered to gloat.
After years of trekking up and down the volcano, dodging murderous rebel fighters to measure seismic activity and record his findings, Mr Wafula predicted last week's eruption perfectly.
"We can expect an eruption in the very near future," he wrote in a report dated Jan 8. But as he flew over the summit for the first time since the blast, Mr Wafula was too curious about his beloved mountain to say "I told you so".
Like a wide-eyed schoolboy he scurried up and down the helicopter pointing at huge cracks in the volcano's flank, taking notes, drawing lava fields on his map and babbling in technical terms incomprehensible to the layman about magma, splatter-bombs and tremor amplitudes.
"It was exactly what we thought," he said. "There was no explosive eruption but a series of flank fractures from which the lava escaped."
He knew each of the three main active peaks on the summit of Nyiragongo perfectly and was itching to touch down so he could measure the depth of the lava lake in the main crater.
But the heat, dust and cloud made it too dangerous so he had to content himself with an airborne observation, which confirmed that the eruption had now ended with no fresh lava surging down the hillside.
What could be seen however was a series of ugly, smoking gashes in the ground, looking like something out of Tolkien's Middle Earth, from which huge puddles of blackened lava stretched miles down the hillside.
"People have to understand that it is possible to monitor a volcano but they must understand the dangers that are inside," said Mr Wafula. If he felt any bitterness that his warning were not heeded, he did not show it. Unpaid for six years, he has got on with his passion - the study of volcanoes and Nyiragongo in particular.
The flight was organised by the United Nations for its own volcano experts. Perhaps in future they could save their money and pay better attention to Mr Wafula's reports.

*
Tuesday, January 22, 2002, p. 06
Petrol blast kills looters in volcano town
Adrian Blomfield; Tim Butcher in Goma
SCORES of looters were killed in the stricken Congolese town of Goma yesterday when a petrol station exploded, apparently ignited by smouldering lava.
A series of explosions sent fireballs high into the air and caused billows of dense black smoke that could be seen from miles around.
The looters, some of whom had not eaten for four days after the eruption of Africa's most dangerous volcano, Nyiragongo, were trying to take the petrol to sell for food.
Witnesses said as many as 100 people, inside the depot at the time, were engulfed by the flames.
"There were many women and children inside, it was packed," said Kiza Barabara.
"The only people who came out were two mothers and two children. Their backs were covered in burns." Adolphe Onusemba, president of rebel-held eastern Congo, said an operation to recover the bodies had been hampered by the fire.
Periodic explosions sent huge fireballs 30ft up. The smoke made it impossible to tell the exact loss of life.
"There were many people inside," Mr Onusemba said. "We cannot estimate the number. When the fires go out we will see if we can recover the bodies."
The latest disaster came as a series of violent earthquakes rocked the once pretty lakeside town.
Western scientists were baffled by the shocks which were more numerous and stronger than had been recorded in the region. At least one shock measured five on the Richter scale, sending people running out of the homes they had just returned to after fleeing the river of lava that destroyed a third of Goma last week.
The scientists said it was impossible to establish whether it was safe for people to return until a new monitoring system was set up.
Jacques Durieux, a French vulcanologist flown into Goma by the United Nations, paid tribute to local experts who predicted last week's eruption four days before it happened. The monitoring system they used was destroyed in the eruption.
"We have no explanation for the shocks and earthquakes although we think they are connected to last week's eruption," he said.
"I spent a long time flying over the volcano today and I saw fractures on the lower slopes that were bigger than I have seen in this region."
It appeared that a series of earthquakes hit the region last week and at least two cracked the earth on the volcano, allowing its lava to flood out.
M Durieux could not rule out further and more devastating earthquakes in the region, which lies in the southern part of the Great Rift Valley, one of the Earth's fault lines between tectonic plates.
International relief efforts gathered momentum around the Rwandan- Congolese border but only a fraction of Goma's 500,000 population had access to food or clean water.
Experts were conducting toxicity tests yesterday on Lake Kivu, the only source of water for the vast majority of the victims, which could have been poisoned by the sulphurous lava pouring into its depths.
"If the water is poisoned we are in big trouble," said Jos Koster, Oxfam UK's director for eastern Congo.
Aid distribution was hampered as thousands of refugees continued to stream back into Goma, much of which was destroyed in Thursday's eruption.
Shunning refugee camps established by the UN in Rwanda, Goma's residents squeezed themselves into what space they could find.
"I have not eaten since Thursday," said Alain Alame, 17. "I am drinking the water of the lake even though it could kill me. Why cannot the international community come to Goma to help me?"

*
January 21, 2002, p. 01
Volcano refugees return to search for families Tim Butcher, in Goma, watches desperate people cross rivers of lava to see if their homes survived the devastation
Tim Butcher
A SOLID wall of volcanic rock looming 10ft high met the braver residents of the Congolese town of Goma as they dodged pockets of noxious gas and blasts of hot smoke to try to reclaim their homes yesterday.
They found a town centre that had been sliced in two by a river of red hot lava, engulfing houses, cars and even the Catholic cathedral before spewing deep into the green water of Lake Kivu in clouds of steam.
On the edge of the lava field the molten rock had sluiced up side streets at roof level before cooling into a black barrier that from a distance looked like a grotesque delivery of tarmac.
"I don't know what we will find," Musambia Ikango, 20, said from beneath a bursting suitcase balanced on his head.
His house was on the other side of the lava field and he had no idea whether it had survived. First he had to work out how to get across. Cautiously he dabbed his finger on the rock. It was uncomfortably hot to the touch but not burning.
Treading lightly like an Indian fakir not entirely confident in his ability to walk on coals, Mr Ikango climbed up the lava and made his way through the clouds of sulphurous gas to the other side.
Many had even more pressing reasons to risk the crossing. "My house is not important but I want to find my wife," said Mahindo Sale, 37. "I was working the day it happened and have not seen her or my five children from that moment."
His story was repeated by dozens of people who fled Goma last week when Mt Nyiragongo volcano threatened to wipe out the town. Mothers sought daughters, fathers sought sons and children sought parents.
Within a few minutes others dared to follow Mr Ikango and a stream of returners hopped lightly over the hot rock barrier dividing east and west Goma.
They carried the few possessions they had fled with - a soggy mattress, a basket of clothes or a bag of food - and hoped their homes had been spared.
In the middle of the lava field the destruction was complete. Nothing could have survived the heat and the crush of the molten rock.
Goma's Boutique Bora may never get back to normal trading; less than a foot of its facade peeked out yesterday from lava that had cooled into odd twisted shapes like oversized liquorice.
The canopies of shops hung in charred shards and the blackened top of a fuel tanker could just be seen.
Only on the edge of the lava was it possible to see more hopeful signs. 
Corrugated iron sheets twisted by the heat had bobbed on the surface of the lava. Children had already started to drag them off to beat them back into shape.
From a Rwandan army helicopter it was possible to see the scale of the lava flow which had run down the side of Mt Nyiragongo more than eight miles away in a matter of minutes. It looked like spilled treacle running down the hillside, splitting into rivulets and carrying all before it.
In places the lava was more than a mile across. Closer inspection showed that while some had come from the volcano's main crater, a completely new crater more than five miles from the peak and much lower in the foothills had opened, spewing out vast volumes of molten rock.
The Catholic cathedral was ruined but its angular concrete walls stood proud and almost alone amid the pumice.
Down on the edge of Lake Kivu - the main reason Goma was popular with tourists during the colonial era - red hot lava continued to flow into the water.
Even 100 yards away the water was as warm as a bath and all day long steam billowed along the shore.
One holiday home on the water's edge had clearly seen better days but its rusty old boathouse, equipped with rails leading down a slipway into the water, had somehow survived.
The Hotel Karibou was not so lucky. It had a hoarding boasting proudly of "views of the lake and the volcanoes". This was no lie: the gardens have been completely re-landscaped in lava.

*
Monday, January 21, 2002, p. 10
Volcano refugees spend their third day without food
Adrian Blomfield in Gisenyi
AN international relief operation began in central Africa yesterday as hundreds of thousands of refugees fleeing Congo's erupting volcano, Nyirangongo, spent a third day without food or clean water.
Homeless after lava swallowed up much of the Congolese town of Goma, hordes of refugees huddled together on the streets of Gisenyi, across the border in Rwanda, and in surrounding regions.
The United Nations built two camps outside Gisenyi, but by last night only 4,700 people had received food and water, out of several hundred thousand initially displaced in the disaster. The greatest immediate threat is posed by the poisoned waters of Lake Kivu, on which Goma and Gisenyi stand side by side. With no fresh water available, refugees have no alternative but to drink from the lake.
Six nurses from the British aid agency Merlin arrived in Goma yesterday to provide the first medical assistance in the town. A third of the first 60 patients they treated were suffering from dysentery. The others had respiratory diseases and eye infections caused by the lava fumes.
"The fresh water being supplied to these people is inadequate," said Bernard Leflaive, Merlin's country director for Eastern Congo. "We are very worried, we are really at risk of a cholera epidemic."
Desperate and frustrated, tens of thousands of refugees poured back on to Goma's 
devastated streets yesterday despite warnings from the UN and the rebel administration in Eastern Congo that it was unsafe to return.
"There are still very strong tremors and there is still the possibility of further volcanic activity," said Laura Melo, World Food Programme spokesman. "The air quality is very bad and there is danger of intoxication by the noxious gases. We are very concerned."
Heedless of the warnings, Goma's residents clambered on to the lava and picked their way through the rubble towards their ruined homes.
Sulphur fumes simmered above the lava, filling the air with an acrid stench. Yet despite all this, residents said they would rather be in the town than spend another night in Rwanda.
"Either way I have nothing," said Ntumba Tresor, a 19-year-old student, outside the shell of his home.
"There I had nothing to eat, nothing to drink. It is the same here, but I prefer to stay here as it is home."
A little further down the molten river his thoughts were echoed by 25-year-old Annie Cote. "They brought us nothing there, they just left us to die," she said. 
"So if we have to die we choose to do it here with our friends and relatives. We don't know what we will do. We have no food, no water, no homes. We need you to help us please. Please."
Rwanda backed the rebel movement which controls Eastern Congo and is widely loathed by the residents of Goma, who consider the country to be an occupying power.
Rebel officials in Goma denounced the "unacceptable slowness" of the international response to the disaster. "For the extent of the calamity we would have expected people to have reacted more generously and more quickly," said Bizima Karaha, interior minister in Eastern Congo and head of Goma's crisis co-ordination committee.
Privately, some independent charities blamed the UN for failing to react adequately to the crisis.
But the UN said the accusations were unfair, insisting that moving in the thousands of tons of supplies needed to cope with a disaster of this magnitude was a long and complicated process.
Britain, America and other western countries have pledged millions of pounds worth of assistance, some of which had arrived in the Rwandan capital, Kigali, last night.
Aid workers said that by the middle of the week there should be enough supplies 
to feed refugees on the Rwandan side of the border.

*
Sunday, January 20, 2002, p. 01
Lake of deadly gas threatens fresh devastation in Goma
ADRIEN BLOMFELD in Goma
AS REFUGEES sheltered in camps last night after fleeing the lava flows from Congo's erupting volcano, fears grew that they could be enveloped in clouds of suffocating gas.
The flows from Mount Nyiragongo, which has forced 500,000 to leave their homes, are ploughing through the waters of Lake Kivu, close to Goma and the Rwandan town of Gisenyi. Large quantities of methane and carbon dioxide are trapped at the bottom of the lake and could be released by the weight and high temperatures of the magma flows."The scare for us is the carbon dioxide," said Jesper Kofoed, a volcanologist 
working for the United Nations. "The methane is highly flammable but could quickly disperse. The carbon dioxide, however, is dangerous in concentrations of just a few per cent. That would suffocate all living creatures."
Yesterday afternoon, the waters near Lake Kivu's shoreline seemed like a bubbling cauldron, ominously throwing acrid sulphur fumes into the air. Rivers of lava oozed through the ruined streets of Goma, large parts of which were still in flames 48 hours after the eruption began. Powerful tremors caused some buildings to collapse and spread further panic among terrified refugees. Volcanologists said the tremors could signal further eruptions, as fissures opened in the ground, unleashing new magma flows.
As hundreds of thousands of refugees spent another uncomfortable night in makeshift camps, Western diplomats gave warning of a fresh public-health danger. 
"Refugees are drinking the lake water, which is poisonous," said Pierre Pinchart, Belgium's military attache to Rwanda. "There is a threat of cholera and dysentery."
Several babies died yesterday, weakened by smoke inhalation and hunger, bringing the known death toll to more than 50.
A team of British aid workers flew to the area to help the homeless after the Government pledged pounds 2 million in emergency relief. Charities such as Oxfam and Christian Aid sent desperately needed supplies.

*
Saturday, January 19, 2002, p. 01
Half a million flee river of molten rock
Adrian Blomfield in Goma
THE sky was lit up over the central African town of Goma last night as a 6ft high river of lava poured from a volcano, enveloping villages in its path, turning buildings to ash and driving hundreds of thousands of people from their homes.
UN officials estimated that 45 people had died in the 24 hours since fissures opened up in the sides of Nyiragongo, shooting molten rock towards the Congolese town.
Aid workers said that between 300,000 and 500,000 people had fled from Goma, either into the surrounding rain forest or into neighbouring Rwanda. The old colonial resort on Lake Kivu was left a ghost town as twisted pieces of corrugated iron floated down rivers of molten rock the height of a man. Hundreds of shacks and houses and the town's Catholic cathedral were reported to have been destroyed.
The last stragglers tried to save what they could, attempting to keep the stinging smoke out of their eyes and mouths with scarves. On Goma's main street, three men carried furniture from a building that was next in line as the tide of lava flowed down the street emitting jets of acrid gas.
"We're suffocating in this town, the smoke is killing us," said Stephen, 25, helping to load a van parked just 20 yards from the black wall of lava. "We're just trying to save what little we can."
Just a day after the eruption, lava quickly flowed down the slopes into the centre of the town, enveloping the airport runway.
A member of the UN observer force deployed in Goma as part of efforts to end Congo's three-year civil war said: "This is going to be a human catastrophe. We have to find them shelter, put them up in camps. There's no electricity, no running water."
A spokesman for the International Committee of the Red Cross said some 100,000 people had crossed the nearby border to the frontier town of Gisenyi. They crowded on to petrol station forecourts, football pitches and every space available.
But aid agency staff were ordered to evacuate both Goma and Gisenyi as the threat of an even larger disaster loomed. Scientists believe the temperature and weight of the lava flowing into Lake Kivu could allow vast quantities of methane to escape from the bottom of the lake, covering both towns in toxic gas.
"In the next few hours there will be maybe half a million people on the roads. It's a very likely, plausible estimate," said a Red Cross spokesman.
The speed of the disaster, a day after the 11,378ft volcano started erupting 10 miles away, seems to have caught many residents by surprise. "There are experts here, but this came without a word from the authorities," said Justin Mosala, 48. "We should have been warned."
Another resident said: "The eruption had already begun in the morning, but the radio was telling us to stay put. At around five or six in the afternoon we could see the flames and we realised it was serious."
The home of the world's last collection of the endangered mountain gorilla is also close by.
Rwandan officials said most of the people who fled across the border were being directed to a temporary camp 35 miles south of Gisenyi.

*
Saturday, January 19, 2002, p. 14
River of lava flowed fast enough to outrun people
David Derbyshire Science Correspondent
IT IS extremely rare for a volcano to produce a river of lava fast enough to outrun and kill a person.
Almost all the victims of volcanic eruptions die in clouds of gas, rock and ash, known as pyroclastic flows, mudslides or tidal waves from undersea eruptions, said Prof Bill McGuire, one of Britain's leading volcano experts.
Nyiragongo, part of a chain of eight volcanoes lying along the borders of Uganda, Rwanda and DR Congo, is one of the continent's most active and most deadly.
Formed on a fault line connected to the African Rift Valley, it has erupted every decade in recent history.
On Jan 10 1977 a lava lake that had filled the crater for 83 years was drained within an hour. Molten rock streamed towards Goma at 40 mph, and within half an hour around 2,000 were dead.
Because Nyiragongo's lava lake is high, and the slopes of the volcano are steep, escaping lava flows at remarkable speeds.
In 1883, 31,400 people died in a tidal wave after the eruption of Krakatoa, Indonesia. Another 5,000 were killed in the explosion, which could be heard 1,900 miles away.
The eruption of Mount Pelee on Martinique in 1902 generated a pyroclastic flow that killed around 29,000.
In May 1980, 66 people died when a bulge on the side of Mount St Helens, Washington, collapsed, sending a hot, thick cloud of ash and gas sliding down the mountainside.
Around 25,000 people died in Colombia in 1985 when Nevado del Ruiz buried the town of Armero in an avalanche of mud and rocks.
Two years ago, Mayon in the Philippines sent rivers of fire down its slopes, forcing around 70,000 people to leave their homes. One woman died. When the volcano erupted in 1993, 68 people died.

*
Saturday, October 20, 2001, p. 06
Blown away by a rugged beauty. The volcano had been stirring of late. We could smell the singed pumice
REBECCA STEPHENS
`Why bother with Reunion?" inquired a Mauritian hotelier, a touch indignantly. He let it be known that the best beach in Reunion wasn't a patch on the least favoured in Mauritius.
"To walk," I said.
For the French, who have kept this island very much for themselves, its rugged and mountainous landscape is one of its main attractions. A friend and I planned to spend a few days wandering around one of the more remote regions in the north-west, the Cirque de Mafate - a caldera formed from a vast, dead volcano - and then head south and east for a glimpse of Piton de la Fournaise, the 
island's one volcano that is still very much alive. Only then would we move to Mauritius and the beach.
We booked ahead at the cheap, no-fuss gites de montagne strategically dotted around the cirque, through the Maison de la Montagne in the capital Sainte-Denis. But it's a long flight to Reunion and we were delayed. To make it to that first gite we had to hand over most of our French francs to a taxi driver, and then wave goodbye and walk - a two-hour hike in the fading light.
Was this wise? The thought gripped me only for a moment before I caught a flag-shaped splash of red and white paint in the beam of my torch. On Reunion, just as on the mainland, the Grande Randonnee offers beautifully maintained trails that thread their way over rocks and through undergrowth.
We were led up to a pass on the caldera rim and steeply down the other side, into the cirque. We were aware only of the miniscule world defined by our torches: a stony path, trees, bulls, untethered and disconcertingly numerous. 
All was silent, until, resonating through the night air, we heard laughter. 
There, far below us, were the lights of a small village, La Nouvelle.
I can think of nowhere else quite like this. Home to some 130 people, it comprises a scattering of wooden and corrugated iron buildings - a chapel, a school, a "boutique" - pitched on a knobbly patch of grassland. It has no street lights, few paths linking one building to another . . . no roads. The only way in and out is by foot (or helicopter).
The beasts we passed on the trail revealed the traditional livelihood of the inhabitants. But since a government initiative to promote tourism in an effort to relieve the island's staggeringly high unemployment (more than 40 per cent), the Cirque de Mafate region relies more on the likes of my friend Jovan and me . . . but somewhat reluctantly.
We eventually stumbled into our gite - a simple, chipboard-lined room with communal shower and loo around the corner. Food was quite another matter. It was 8pm, everyone was in bed.
We tried a second gite, across the tufted grass. There was a light - hope, at least - and inside a small gathering of Frenchmen leaning heavily into their chairs with obvious post-prandial satisfaction.
"Table pour deux," Jovan suggested.
"Pas possible. C'est finis," said the young waiter.
We didn't know what to do - unable to muster enough words in French to persuade this young man otherwise. Slowly the message sank in. We should have read the small print and booked supper. The young man relented and produced a couple of plates from somewhere.
But the lesson wasn't over. We arrived in the next village at about 2pm the following day, just as the island was enveloped in a dank and chilly cloud. This time we weren't about to be caught out. Immediately we booked dinner - but again, "non". It didn't matter that the table was laid, or that in the evening we watched as a party of schoolchildren tucked into an overly generous spread of Creole chicken, beans, chutney and French wine. We were relegated to the garden with thick jumpers, two spoons and a tin of lentils.
"In England, maybe, but on French territory," cried Jovan, incredulously. The small print again - we should have booked ahead, this time by 48 hours.
Breakfast, the guardian could manage. Dry biscuits and jam. Good coffee. We sat out in the garden, the sun shining, and gazed at a sort of Tolkien-like fantasy landscape of criss-crossing gullies and razor ridges. The caldera rim rose at an almost vertical pitch 3,000 feet above our heads, a bright, tropical green. And all about us there were familiar-looking house plants and palms and vividly painted petals. The morning skies were clear, the air warm - the perfect time to walk - and but for the school party we hardly saw a single person.
It was all very different from our night in the shadow of Piton de la Fournaise. There must have been 20 of us in the Gite de Volcan that night, all hopeful of a sunrise scramble to the summit - and all sadly disappointed. The volcano had 
been stirring of late, causing great consternation and traffic jams of Reunionnais eager to see it blast. We could smell the singed pumice hanging in the air.
Too dangerous, we were told.
Back on the east coast of Mauritius, everything was glittering lights, sprinklers, uniforms and golf buggies.
"Anything I can get you, Madam? A cocktail, Champagne?"
It's always the same: a few days of denial in the hills and then that first morsel of refined food and that first crisp, cold glass of wine - and all is lost, or, more accurately, gained.
But I had no complaints. Le Saint Geran sits on a promontory surrounded by white sands and ocean. The style is colonial, the service impeccably unintrusive, the prices high - about pounds 700 a night for a double room. And that's low season, with water sports thrown in for free. In the evenings you can dine at Alain Ducasses's Spoon des Iles.
Even the beach vendors here have credit card facilities.
Getting there
Rebecca Stephens booked her Reunion accommodation through Maison de la Montagne in Sainte-Denis (00 262 90 7878), which is happy to arrange personal itineraries. In Mauritius, she was the guest of Sun International (www.sunresort.com). Le Saint Geran can be booked through Leading Hotels of the World (0800 181123, www.lhw.com). French Government Tourist Office (09068 244123 - 60p a minute, www.franceguide.com). Reunion Tourisme website: www.le-reunion- tourisme.com.

*
Sunday, September 16, 2001, p. 24
UK team finds rare bird under the volcano
BRIAN UNWIN AND ADAM LUSHER
A BRITISH-LED expedition has discovered one of the world's rarest species of bird surviving yards from the crater of the volcano that devastated the 
Caribbean island of Montserrat four years ago.
Led by a scientist from the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds, the research team found at least 25 pairs of Montserrat Orioles (Icterus oberi) living beneath the rim of the Soufriere Hills volcano. Since 1997, the birds have remained hidden, marooned by ash in a square-mile patch of forest less than a mile from the crater. They have survived regular showers of volcanic debris and frequently endured rock falls caused by the active crater.
Their existence was only revealed after a joint RSPB and Montserrat Forestry Department team flew onto the upper slopes of the volcano by helicopter to try to chart the effects of the eruption on the island birds. The discovery brings fresh hope for the Montserrat Oriole, which has suffered an unprecedented decline elsewhere on the island since 1997 and is found nowhere else in the world.
Chris Bowden, the RSPB biologist who led last month's expedition, said: "It's incredible to think that one of the last remaining havens for a bird teetering on the verge of extinction is so close to the crater of an exploding volcano.
"We saw 10 birds in three hours, including juveniles, which suggests they have been breeding successfully. It was a great sight."
The thrush-sized oriole - the male is black and yellow, the female mainly olive yellow - is the island's national bird, proudly displayed on the British dependency's stamps. At least 60 per cent of its prime habitat was destroyed by the Soufriere Hills volcano. Scientists feared that the bird, confined to what they thought was its last stronghold in the Centre Hills area, had no better than a 50- 50 chance of avoiding extinction.
The RSPB, the Montserrat Forestry Department and the Montserrat National Trust started emergency work to save the oriole, and are now being aided by a pounds 130,000 Foreign Office grant. The researchers became intrigued by a small patch of surviving forest in the foothills near the crater. "We'd spotted it on the aerial photographs and were dying to get in to see if any orioles had survived," Mr Bowden said.
The four-strong team flew in by helicopter. "We just didn't know what to expect. Looking at the soil, it was clear that the orioles have had fairly regular ash and mud falls.
"There's no questioning the orioles' determination to survive."

*
Thursday, September 6, 2001, p. 18
Thousands flee as volcano lake is drained
Alex Spillius South East Asia Correspondent
THOUSANDS of people on army lorries, buffaloes and horses joined a state-ordered evacuation yesterday, fearing that their town could be flooded if a daring 
attempt to drain a volcano's lake goes wrong.
The exodus from a district of Botolan in the Philippines came after scientists warned that their homes might be swamped by up to 13 billion gallons of water from Mount Pinatubo, 25 miles away.
A canal has been dug through a wall of the crater to direct the waters down channels and into the South China Sea. But scientists said there was a 20 per cent risk that the volume of water freed might exceed estimates. If the operation goes according to plan, five billion gallons will be drained off in the first 24 hours.
The Pinatubo lake has filled with rainwater since the volcano's top was blown off during an eruption in 1991 that claimed 800 lives. It left a hole covering two square miles.
Oxfam and other emergency agencies have for months warned the Filipinos of disaster, as the crater nearly filled during the rainy season, the pressure threatening to break the crater walls. Alex Renton, a spokesman for Oxfam East Asia, said: "We are very glad the authorities are finally taking action.
"It is, however, troubling that the evacuation is taking place with 24 hours warning rather than 24 days. Our staff are going door to door to make sure people are leaving."

*
Thursday, August 30, 2001, p. 12
Etna becoming 'more violent'
David Derbyshire Science Correspondent
MOUNT Etna is going through an identity crisis and is likely to emerge a more violent volcano, geologists said yesterday.
The Sicilian volcano, which had its biggest eruption for a decade this summer, is changing its nature and making an unprecedented switch from one type of volcano to another.
Over the past 100,000 years it has moved from being a "hotspot" volcano, where a plume of molten rock rises through the Earth's mantle, to one resembling a more powerful "island arc" volcano.
Here, eruptions are triggered by the collision of tectonic plates. A slab of crust is pushed deep into the Earth, it melts and creates magma that rises to the surface.
The geologists studied lava emitted by Mount Etna over the past 500,000 years. Over time, the nature of the volcano changed from one mostly sourced by mantle plumes to one with a greater contribution from the collision of Africa and Europe.
Dr Pierre Schiano, of the Blaise Pascal University, in Clermont- Ferrant, France, who reports the change in the journal Nature, said the discovery explained Etna's peculiar behaviour.
"If the plume-arc interaction we have identified continues, then we anticipate that Mount Etna will become more explosive," he said.
Etna, which had its first of 200 recorded eruptions in 1500BC, lies close to the boundary between two regions that have very different types of volcanoes.
The volcanoes in the Aeolian island arc were created in the collision of the European and African tectonic plates. However, on Sicily, there is no evidence of island arc volcanoes and Etna appears to have been the result of a mantle plume.

*
Saturday, August 25, 2001, p. 05
Gavin Bell
Etna after the fireworks The eruptions are terrifying, but local villagers regard their volcano as more money-spinner than menace, finds Gavin Bell.
The Greatest Show on Earth began with a deep rumble. Mike Burton felt it distinctly when the ground beneath his feet trembled. He was standing on the rim of the south-east crater of Mount Etna at the time, admiring and measuring a fountain of lava, which is what he does for a living (he's a vulcanologist). 
Sensing that something was stirring in the bowels of Europe's biggest volcano, he and his colleagues wisely retreated.
"We knew that something was going to happen, but what or when exactly was hard to say," he recalls.
Four days later, the lair of ancient gods and monsters erupted with rare violence, hurling molten rock hundreds of feet into the air and spewing rivers of lava that devoured ski-lift pylons and threatened a tourist station.
At the foot of the mountain, Angelo Nicolosi, manager of the Hotel Villa Paradiso dell'Etna, watched the pyrotechnics in awe. "In 50 years, this is the most spectacular I have seen. There was a line of fire - it was as if the mountain was splitting open."
Images of the eruption were flashed around the world, with dramatic reports of mayhem on the mountain; bulldozers battling to divert the lava, villagers in its path praying for salvation. For three weeks, it seemed the most dangerous place on Earth.
Well, it wasn't. The truth is that Etna, in fact, is quite a placid volcano, whose frequent tantrums may be observed from a respectful distance with equanimity. Unlike the unstoppable rivers of fire that gush from other volcanos at more than 60 mph (Vesuvius, for example), the viscous lava of Etna moves ponderously at less than half a mile per hour.
"The mountain gives us time to pack our bags and leave safely," says Antonio Massaglia, a retired civil servant who has lived in a village beneath its craters all of his life. Burton, the vulcanologist from Oxford, agrees: "It's dangerous if you are close to an eruption, but, generally, it's not going to kill anyone. The lava flows tend to harm buildings, not people."
Historians reckon that Etna, notorious as a destroyer of ancient cities, killed fewer people in its early eruptions than now die on Italian roads at weekends. To thousands of people who live on the 3,310m (10,860ft) mountain, it is known as il gigante buono, the good giant. This is because its ash fertilises the soil, its winter snows provide rivers of clear water, and its basaltic rock is ideal for building bridges and dams. It also brings tourists by the busload. On an island heavily in debt, blighted by a moribund economy and the Mafia, the convoys of visitors that trundle up the mountain every day are another blessing of the good giant.
Many of them pass through the village of Nicolosi, which was founded by Benedictine monks in 1437, wiped out by an eruption in 1669, and rebuilt and recently repackaged as "The Door to Etna".
More than halfway up the mountain, it was in the line of fire of the latest lava flow, which halted barely a couple of miles away. The locals were understandably concerned, but temporal and spiritual emergency plans - bulldozers and Virgin Marys - saved the day.
Such experiences engender philosophical attitudes. "What can we do?" says Giuseppa Rapisarda, widow of a farm worker. "Our house was built here. We have this nice volcano: he is beautiful to look at, but sometimes he gets angry and scares us. That's the way it is."
After all the excitement, the rhythms of Sicilian life have resumed their leisurely pace in Nicolosi. In the Piazza Vittorio Emanuele, old men sit on benches in the shade of chestnut trees and watch approvingly as the tourist buses queue up opposite the offices of the Christian Democratic Party.
The cafes are busy and the souvenir shops are doing a steady trade in tacky figures sculpted from lava and covered with sparkly glitter. The Madonnas and Roman chariots seem to be selling well. The only reminder of Etna's recent performance is a small residue of black ash in the streets that the first rains will wash away.
Behind the old men, on a patch of grass, squats a memento of a more serious eruption. It is a huge lump of dark, craggy rock bearing the inscription: "Bomba Vulcanica 1669". The message is one of pride, rather than fear - it may be a fiery mountain, but it is their mountain.
It is also, from all aspects, a very impressive mountain. It rises from the shores of the Ionian Sea with the kind of majesty and classical splendour one would expect from the mythical furnace of Vulcan, the maker of Jupiter's thunderbolts.
Occasionally, its smouldering summit is framed by a thin layer of cloud and, from a distance, it appears hazy and dreamlike, the stuff of legends. There should be graffiti saying Zeus was here.
On closer inspection, it is a mixture of heaven and hell. The lower slopes, fertilised by volcanic ash, are clothed in orchards and vineyards, rising to forests of oak and pine and thickets of broom that blossom golden yellow in spring.
Then you see the lava. Great barren swathes of it, a monstrous jumble of molten rock that has solidified into a dark, sharp-edged wasteland. And towering above it is the summit, with its cones and craters, like a gigantic slag heap emitting noxious fumes.
Visitors may inspect the course of the latest lava flow, which was diverted by earth barricades a few steps from souvenir shops and restaurants in the tourist station of Rifugio Sapienza. It swept away pylons of a cable car lift, however, which lie mangled in mute testimony to the impotence of man against the forces of nature.
Looking up, one can see clearly the path of the lava, like a river of sludge, where it flowed over a shoulder of the mountain, past the huddle of tourist facilities and over an access road that has been deluged countless times.
The lava flow is still warm, and a popular pastime is lobbing rocks at it in the hope of seeing them melt, which they don't. The other apparent attraction is collecting bits of it in plastic bags, which is unwise.
The late Sicilian author Leonardo Sciascia put his finger on the relationship between Etna and those who live on it: "It's like a huge house cat that snores quietly: every now and then, it wakes, yawns, streches lazily and, with a swipe of its paw, destroys a valley here or there."
At such times, the spectacular effects may be viewed from the gardens of the baroque Hotel Villa Paradiso dell'Etna, while a pianist entertains guests with a selection of popular melodies.
Beneath the volcano, the band plays on.
Gavin Bell travelled with Citalia (020 8686 5533, www.citalia.com/ -italy). Seven nights in the four-star Hotel Villa Paradiso dell'Etna in San Giovanni la Punta, at the foot of Etna, costs pounds 765, including charter flights from Gatwick or Manchester to Catania, b & b and car hire. Three nights with scheduled Alitalia flights from Heathrow for pounds 635.
In Nicolosi, the tourist office runs coach trips to the Rifugio Sapienza for about pounds 7. Book a ticket when you get there.

*
Saturday, August 18, 2001, p. 11
Gavin Bell
Lava saga Things are more complex in nearby Iceland, where Gavin Bell takes his cue from Jules Verne and journeys to the centre of the Earth
It is not easy to get to the centre of the Earth. First, you must travel to an island near the Arctic Circle that looks as if it has just emerged from the Ice Age. Then there is a journey of more than 100 miles along a wild shoreline, to the end of a peninsula of dark mountains. There you must ascend a dormant volcano, to a summit encased in a glacier. Then, according to Jules Verne, comes the hard part.
It was on this mountain, or rather in it, that Verne sent the intrepid Professor Lidenbrock of Hamburg and his nephew Axel on their Journey to the Centre of the Earth on June 28, 1863. Not many people come here. But those who do leave with memories of a magnificent wilderness sculpted by Nature while listening to Wagner. The mountain is Snaefells, which means Hill of Snow, and it lies on the tip of a bony finger of land pointing towards America from the west coast of Iceland. It is a place of Viking sagas, the spiritual home of a legendary half-man half-troll who safeguards fishermen, and according to a New Age community at its foot, it is one of seven primary energy sources of Mother Earth. It is also very beautiful, and easier to get to than in Verne's day.
On a clear day you can see Snaefells from Keflavik international airport, 70 miles away as the Arctic tern flies, across a broad sweep of the north Atlantic. 
It has the classic symmetrical profile of a volcano and, with its mantle of snow, looks like a Nordic Mount Fuji. From a distance it seems detached, like an island rising from a cobalt sea, and at nearly 5,000 feet it is by far the most prominent feature in a barren landscape of lava and ice. Such sightings are rare. The average number of fine days in Iceland in July is one, so I regarded its apparition in bright sunshine on my arrival as a good omen.
Prof Lidenbrock's nephew was not impressed by Reykjavik (two "bleak, depressing avenues" in a dismal landscape; its citizens seemed resigned to being outcasts). 
Anthony Trollope, who passed by a few years later, described it as "a fishy town".
Fishing is still the main industry, but the capital and the folk who live in it are cheerier nowadays. A substantial part of the country may be under layers of ice, but in a coffee shop called Uncle Tom's Cabin life has evolved rich cultural diversity. One day I found a woman singing to her partner at a table by the window, a youth reading poetry to an attentive girl and a middle-aged man knitting a chunky sweater. He said it made a nice change from writing computer programs.
Buses leave for the centre of the Earth, so to speak, on weekdays from Reykjavik, collecting and delivering people and mail on the way, and linking with smaller coaches to more remote areas. In the absence of bus stops they halt at farm tracks, affording time for the locals to enjoy a sociable chat, and for the rest of us to admire the scenery.
Young Axel did not enjoy this part of the trip, which took a week on horseback. 
Bemoaning "the melancholy of this untamed nature", he declared: "I hardly realised at this stage what a sight awaited us on the Snaefells peninsula, where the damage wrought by an impulsive nature forms a fearsome chaos." All good dramatic literary stuff, but a touch exaggerated.
The landscape is certainly wild. This is a place where the distance between the 21st century and the Triassic era is the width of a two-lane highway. In geological terms, Iceland is at the adolescent tantrum stage, and it shows. Most of the hills are like giant slag heaps, as if they have just spewed out of volcanos that rumble every five years or so. The highlands that range along the peninsula form a continuous fossilised wave, as if frozen in the instant of crashing on the shore. Beneath lowering grey skies and squalls of rain that pass for summer weather on Iceland, they are a daunting sight. Then a shaft of sunlight pierces the gloom and illuminates a white farmhouse by the sea, and the effect is magical.
At the end of the surfaced road, a mini-bus was waiting to take us the last few miles on a track of lava ash to Arnarstapi, a colourful straggle of houses at the foot of Snaefells, occupied in summer by fishermen. It also has a restaurant in a wooden chalet, with a grass roof, where I enjoyed freshly landed cod and heard an Icelandic saga.
The tale of Bardar, as related by an obliging waitress, went as follows: "He is a legend in our history. He was a fisherman who lived here soon after the first settlers came. He had nine daughters, and the youngest was his favourite. Her name was Helka. One winter morning she was playing with two nephews, and they pushed her on to an iceberg. They thought it was funny, but then the iceberg drifted away.
"When her father came home he was very angry and he killed the boys. The story says he threw one down the mountain so hard it caused a crack; the other he threw far out to sea. Then he went to live alone on the glacier, and they say he is buried there in a crater filled with water. The fishermen say he still comes to them and warns them of storms."
It was no surprise to find a giant dry-stone statue of Bardar on a cliff overlooking the sea, keeping a benevolent eye on the local fishing fleet.
My guide for the ascent of Snaefells was Kari, a carpenter from Reykjavik who leads tours as a summer job. He was a practical man: "The New Age people say this mountain gives you energy, but I don't believe the mystical stuff. I think beautiful nature anywhere gives you energy." As if on cue, as we wound up a cinder track in a four- wheel drive, nature parted the clouds and revealed the peaks of Snaefells, rising like the curved horns of a mythical beast.
Where Professor Lidenbrock and Axel struggled up the final 1,500 feet, we donned fur-lined snowsuits and hopped on snowmobiles to zip up the glacier in a matter of minutes, to a ridge between the two principal summits.
This was the moment I had been waiting for. This was the spot where Verne's heroes had been drawn by a cryptic message from a 16th- century scholar: "Go down into the crater of Snaefells jokul (glacier), which the shadow of Scartaris caresses before the calends of July, O audacious traveller, and you will reach the centre of the Earth."
By a curious coicidence, I had come at the right time to observe this phenomenon. Unfortunately Kari did not know which, if either, of the peaks was Scartaris, and the sun was obscured by clouds anyway. So I edged gingerly forward to the ridge and peered over, into a vast white bowl hundreds of feet below, and imagined peerless adventurers descending into this trackless wilderness and beyond, into the bowels of the Earth.
"So this is the crater," I said.
"No," Kari said. "This is a bit of the mountain that disappeared in an eruption."
"So where's the crater then?"
"You're standing on it."
I looked around, puzzled, at a gently sloping snowfield. The bottom of the crater, Kari explained, was 820 feet beneath us. It was filled with ice, a minor detail Verne omitted to mention.
Kari sensed my bemusement. "There are crevasses in the glacier; they could have gone down one of those."
On reflection, I was prepared to forgive Verne. He had, after all, lured me to a place of extravagant natural beauty, and as we descended, the skies cleared and the peninsula was transformed. Colours returned to hills and coastal meadows, clouds of Arctic terns and fulmars swirled around dramatic rock formations by the shore, and a lone fishing boat carved a silver wake on a quiet sea.
Before disappearing down a lava tunnel, Axel finally found something good to say about Iceland: "Here nature has constructed a severe order which has never been surpassed, even by the marvels of Babylon or the wonders that were Greece."
Iceland basics
Getting there Travelscene (020 8424 9648, www.travelscene.co.uk) has two-night breaks in Reykjavik from pounds 373 per person, including scheduled Icelandair flights from Heathrow or Glasgow and b & b in the Hotel Leifur Eriksson. BSI Travel in Reykjavik (00 354 562 3320/2300, www.bsi.is) has one-day return trips to Snaefells, including bus transport and snowmobiles to the summit for pounds 95 per person.
Staying there The Leifur Eriksson (00 354 562 0800) is small, friendly and 
ideally located in central Reykjavik; doubles with breakfast pounds 60- pounds 
100, depending on season.
When to go June-August for long summer nights, before the country goes into 
hibernation.

*
Monday, July 30, 2001, p. 10
Bruce Johnston in Rome
Sicily asks God to stop Etna's lava flows
SICILIANS whose homes are in the path of lava running down the slopes of Mount Etna prayed yesterday for divine intervention, as efforts by man failed to tame the volcano.
In Nicolosi, worshippers crowded into the Santa Maria della Grazia church, where they laid flowers at the shrine of St Anthony, their patron saint, who is said to halt eruptions.
In the nearby Madonna dell Roccia di Belpasso sanctuary, Archbishop Luigi Bonmarito of Catania celebrated a special Mass for thousands in an attempt to save the town of Belpasso, which computer projections say could also be overrun.
The two-week eruption is proving unpredictable as it speeds up or slows down almost daily. Experts say it could go on for months.
"Local people still believe in miracles," Gianbattista Martinazzoli, a teacher, said as he left Mass in Nicolosi. "If human technology can't keep the lava back, the Eternal Father is our only salvation."
The eruption has already claimed several farmhouses, a restaurant, stretches of road and a ski lift. Catania's airport was forced to close on Saturday because the dust was so thick.
Higher up from Nicolosi and Belpasso, bulldozers worked round the clock yesterday to build embankments to contain the lava, which is now at the gates of a tourist resort, the Rifugio Sapienza.
Although its front recently began to slow down, the lava is now building up in a depression about 1,100ft above sea level and experts fear it could burst like a dam without warning.

*
Wednesday, July 25, 2001, p. 15
Bruce Johnston in Genoa
Hopes of saving towns rise as Etna lava flow slows down
STREAMS of lava heading for communities on the slopes of Mount Etna slowed yesterday, raising hopes that built-up areas might be saved from destruction. 
Experts said the lava flow threatening two towns on Etna's southern slopes, Nicolosi and Belpasso, had almost halted 2 1/2 miles away, or about a third of the way down Europe's largest active volcano (10,705ft).
"The lava moved forward only about 10 metres. It shows signs of fatigue. It is broadening out and becoming more dense," said a civil protection spokesman.
The lava, which was 30ft deep in some places, slowed after two new fissures opened on Etna's south-eastern slopes. These were said to be helping to ease pressure on the original streams.
The civil protection team said that it would take advantage of the lull to use bulldozers to try to deviate the path of the flow from inhabited areas.

*
Saturday, June 30, 2001, p. 01
Michael Crichton
Master of the fantastic Jules Verne's novels dealt with the future in incredible ways. Why haven't they dated? Michael Crichton, best- selling author of books including Jurassic Park, explains the lasting appeal of his great forebear.
WHEN the weather is clear, the white cone of Snaefellsnes's volcano is visible from Reykjavik harbour, looking very much as Jules Verne described it 140 years ago in his novel Journey to the Centre of the Earth. It is a testament to the enduring fame of this novel that no Icelander today refers to Snaefellsnes without, in the same sentence, mentioning Verne: "That's the volcano where Jules Verne set his story . . ."
Tourist literature calls Snaefellsnes (now a national park) "Jules Verne's Volcano". And when the Nobel Prize-winning Icelandic novelist Halldor Laxness wrote his novel Under the Glacier in 1972, be felt obliged to note in the first few pages that Verne had long before staked an enduring literary claim to this same glacier.
The strength of Verne's claim derives, in large part, from the continuing popularity of his tale, which has captivated generations of readers, while its title and plot are familiar to many millions who have not read it. Journey to the Centre of the Earth is one of the most famous novels ever written.
Its author was 36 years old when he wrote it, a young lawyer who had chosen a career in the arts, in defiance of his strict father's wishes. Jules Verne had first turned his hand to the theatre, and his early plays were well received. But they did not earn their author much money. Verne's father continued to press his son to choose a more practical occupation. Verne doggedly continued his writing career. At one point, to see his name in print, he began writing short articles on scientific subjects for magazines.
This was a time of enormous interest in the achievements of scientists and engineers, for it seemed each week brought the report of fresh technological wonders. Trains now travelled at 50 miles an hour. London was building an underground rail system beneath the heart of the city. Bridges spanned vast gorges; hot-air balloons rose into the air; submarines slid beneath the water. 
It seemed that men were everywhere exploring and conquering new realms, empowered by the latest developments of science.
French education did not yet include instruction in science, so there was a great demand among readers for popular articles to educate them on scientific subjects. Verne was one of those who helped supply this demand.
At some point Verne conceived of a novel that would be as informative about science as his magazine articles, but would also combine elements of adventure and discovery in an entertaining way. Verne wrote such a book in 1862, calling it "An Air Voyage". Retitled Five Weeks in a Balloon by his new publisher, Pierre-Jules Hetzel, Verne's story was an immediate smash hit. And Verne's literary career was finally launched.
Freed from doubts about the direction of his career, Verne experienced a phenomenal burst of creativity. In the decade following Five Weeks in a Balloon, he wrote nearly all of the novels for which he is remembered: Journey to the Centre of the Earth (1864); From the Earth to the Moon (1865); Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Sea (1869); and Around the World in Eighty Days (1872).
Now, almost a century and a half later, these novels are all still familiar to readers around the world, still in print, still widely read. Indeed, Verne is one of the few 19th-century novelists young people read for pleasure, and not merely to fulfil a school assignment.
Verne's continuing readership is impossible to explain if one thinks of him as a science-fiction writer, trading on new technological wonders. Verne himself once denied that he had any real interest in science, and he emphasised his lack of scientific training. In any case, Verne's miraculous technologies are by now antique, his dazzling adventures old hat. We have cruised in atomic submarines; we have travelled to the moon; we have gone around the world in 80 days - then 80 hours - and finally 80 minutes. His technology no longer holds any interest. Yet Verne's novels continue to excite readers, just as they did 140 years ago. 
He is, by some accounts, the most popular author in the world. His prose style contributes to this. Verne's prose is lean and fast-moving in a peculiarly modern way, although this has not always been seen as a virtue by critics.Indeed, from his earliest success until his death in 1905, Verne's literary reputation never matched his popularity; in later life he was bitter that he had not been made a member of the Academie Franaise. Today, he is regarded much more seriously by French critics than he ever was during his lifetime.
Verne's lean prose reads quickly, generating much of the headlong rush so familiar to readers. It does not belabour descriptions or mental states; rather, it moves swiftly to Verne's primary concern, which is physical action: movement through the external world. Verne always maintained that his enduring love was not science but geography. And most of his writing, both fiction and non-fiction, concerns travel or geographical exploration. His stripped-down, athletic prose is perfectly suited to this end.
But taut prose, like science fiction, is inadequate as an explanation for Verne's popularity. To explain that, we must turn to the story itself. What Verne does, in book after book, is to recount a fantastic adventure with verisimilitude. In doing so, he revives our sense of mythic wonder, our deep feeling of connection to the physical world, and our appreciation of the practical possibilities of human imagination and human effort. It is a deep and powerful combination. And it was Verne's speciality for some 60 novels.
Jules Verne was not the first author to write a novel as if it were true, to imitate a popular true adventure form, or to incorporate quantities of fact into the narrative. All that had been done by Daniel Defoe, an author Verne much admired. Verne was doing something else.
Verne was the first author to write novel-length fantasies in a realistic manner. He found a way to tell absolutely fantastic stories as if they were true. This is his innovation, and I believe this is the source of his continuing hold on readers. One could say that Verne found a technique that merged romance and realism, and the result is enormously pleasurable. It is also inherently conflicted - a conflict mirrored within the author himself.
As I read him, Jules Verne never felt comfortable writing realistic fiction; he always tried to escape realistic constraints. He was, after all, strongly 
influenced by the Romantic tradition. His earliest writing had shown a polemical tendency and a taste for tragedy; he was at heart anything but realistic. All his life, Verne was drawn to the extreme, the fantastic. There is certainly abundant evidence of this tendency in Journey to the Centre of the Earth, one of his least plausible novels.
At the same time, Verne - spurred on by Hetzel - was writing novels intended to be educational. Inevitably, this meant that many passages had to be as straightforward and factual as a textbook. Such passages would not blend smoothly into the narrative unless the rest of the text adopted a similarly factual tone. Thus, Verne had no choice but to write his fantastic story as if it were true. He was forced into it by the educational material embedded within it.
The resulting tension between fact and fantasy is what energises Verne's tales. 
It is a delicate balance, and he did not always achieve it. When his stories are too documentary-like, they become pedantic and dull; when they become too overtly fantastic, credibility suffers and tension collapses. Verne works best when he grips both strands firmly, and weaves them seamlessly.
There is no better example than Journey to the Centre of the Earth.The story has many fantastic elements. Professor Otto Lidenbrock, with the help of his young nephew Axel, deciphers a mysterious, coded message concealed in a 12th-century Icelandic book. The message, from one Arne Saknussemm (a celebrated alchemist of the 16th century), claims that he has gone through Snaefellsnes volcano to the centre of the Earth.
Lidenbrock decides to repeat the journey, with Axel at his side. Starting in Iceland, the three men travel deep beneath the Earth, where they discover an inland sea, a race of giants, and other marvels. Clearly a fantasy. Clearly difficult to make credible. And yet much of the pleasure of reading this book is to see such outrageous events portrayed so convincingly.
Verne has left us an extraordinary book, which has withstood the test of time better than some of the science described within it. It has brought delight to generations of readers, and will for many more. There is nothing so rare as the chance to take an impossible journey, and to believe it so powerfully that we wonder if we will make it out alive. That's magic. And that's Verne's gift.
This is taken from Michael Crichton's introduction to Jules Verne's `Journey to the Centre of the Earth', published on July 19 at pounds 19.95 by the Folio Society, available direct from the Folio Society only, on 020 7400 4200

*
Monday, June 25, 2001, p. 11
Thousands flee as volcano erupts
Alex Spillius, South East Asia Correspondent
THOUSANDS of Filipino villagers fled from their homes yesterday as the Mayon volcano erupted, spitting out flaming ash and sending huge boulders tumbling down its slopes.
Booming sounds were heard just before 1pm and a giant mushroom cloud of dust and ash shot six miles into the sky from the volcano's mouth.
Villagers living at the foot of the volcano, in Albay province, 205 miles south-east of Manila, began leaving their homes during the night as smaller blasts shook houses up to eight miles away.
Sirens were sounded and megaphones used to rouse sleeping residents. Dozens of army lorries, police cars and other government vehicles sped out from the provincial capital, Legazpi, to villages at the foot of Mayon to speed the evacuation.
In the panic, a woman collapsed with a heart attack while another gave birth prematurely. A villager fleeing on a bicycle was killed when he was struck by a rescue team's van. Officials at the Philippines Institute of Vulcanology and Seismology said Mayon had erupted 47 times since 1616.

*
Saturday, May 12, 2001, p. 13
Heaven for vulcanologists In the remote Auvergne, geology has played timeless tricks with the landscape. James Bedding climbs where lava once flowed.
James Bedding
From our cottage to the top of our volcano was about a minute's climb. Out through the kitchen door to the garden gate, and a scramble up the grassy outcrop beyond. Around the volcano's edges rose columns that looked man-made. 
Round here they call these formations orgues, because they resemble clusters of organ pipes. Before the rock cooled and crystallised into geometric columns, it was red, scorching, sulphurous lava, surging up through punctures in the surface of the earth.
From the volcano, I could see tens of miles. Thick forest and the occasional patch of pasture covered most of the undulating landscape, which was scored by deep valleys. In the distance I could make out villages, groups of houses around a church, all of grey volcanic rock; and between them, like geological punctuation marks, the solidified cores of other long-extinct volcanoes.
This is the Auvergne, the volcanic core at the centre of France. Long isolated because of its rugged terrain, the largest volcanic ensemble in Europe is still one of the least visited corners of the country.
We had come to its south-easternmost limit, the departement of Haute-Loire. 
Here, just short of the deeply gorged limestone of the Ardeche region, the lush, forested landscape has a pockmarked feel; look hard beyond the squat, huddled villages and the pastures, and everywhere you see the pimples and scars left by volcanic activity over much of the past 10 million years.
Clustered below one such pimple was our own village, Bigorre. In a lazy loop slung below the outcrop lay a couple of dozen houses, most with stone roofs, a handful thatched. One of the latter was an ecomusee - a rural museum. Back in 1930, 200 people lived here, said the young guide; now only nine people are here year-round. She pointed out the small windows in the houses. "People were taxed according to the size and number of the windows," she said. "But they also made them small because of the wind."
Across the road, in L'Herminette - a large farmhouse converted into a simple auberge de pays, with views over miles of thick forest - the hotel owner elaborated. "Oh yes, the wind," he said, "la burle. It blows and blows. The weather is tough here. We're at 1,130 metres [3,700ft], so we get a lot of cross-country skiers. Winter lasts five months. The wind blows the snow into drifts, which block the roads. But then maybe another wind comes from the south, and two metres of snow will melt in 24 hours.
"It's too tough for most people to live here," he said. "The school closed in 1965; now most of these are holiday homes, belonging to people who live in the town or the city. But their parents, or grandparents, were probably born in the village."
Back at our cottage, I began to understand the introverted feel of the 18th-century stone farm building. It was squat, low and thick- walled, as if cowering for protection in the lee of the volcano, sheltering from some natural force - even in August, there was a breeze every day, if not a blustery wind. 
Inside, we had a vast, dark living space of exposed stone walls and wooden floor, a big kitchen overlooked by a stuffed boar head with a sneer; below, in the basement, a table tennis table, and outside, a small terrace, sheltered from the breeze, and a garden overlooking, at the end, a small stone chamber - formerly the village's communal oven.
From the top of our little volcano we set off for walks past the thatched cottages, and into the woods and pastures beyond. Footpaths led us along walls of rough-hewn volcanic boulders, and in and out of the pine forests. Most striking of all was the vastness of the sky; and whichever direction we looked, we saw birds of prey gliding, hovering, wheeling, scanning the ground below them. I have never seen skies so freely speckled with raptors: buzzards, kites, kestrels, harriers - living off a land I presumed to be relatively free from chemical contamination.
One day we set our sights on the tallest peak on our horizon, the summit of Mont Mezenc, at 5,750ft, one of the highest peaks of the Massif Central. The wide path from the car park led us up through pine forests to a summit scattered with giant slabs of volcanic rock that rang out a distinctive "chink" when they bumped together. Geologists call them phonolites - sound stones - and the dull chimes accompanied our climb to the blustery summit, where we lost count of the volcanic plugs and lava outflows that lay scattered below in every direction.
All around, we discovered a wild and empty landscape, hilly rather than mountainous, of huge open spaces that are somehow liberating and giddying; an open boundlessness that gives you, in the words of one local writer, "vertige de l'horizontale". You feel that you could easily lose yourself here; and indeed, many have. During the Second World War, these wild lands were a stronghold of the Resistance, and hunted people disappeared into the emptiness, to be whisked to safety in Switzerland. In the villages around Mont Mezenc - a haven, over the centuries, for Protestants fleeing persecution - as many as 5,000 Jewish children were taken in, and saved from deportation.
Closer to our cottage, we visited some of the nearby villages. At Boussoulet, locals had opened up the old communal oven to celebrate the Fete de Pain, and were idling away the afternoon chatting as batch after batch of bread, brioche and pizza emerged from the oven, golden and crisp, to be gobbled on the spot. 
Near St Front we walked along the wooded shore of a tranquil, perfectly circular lake - the flooded crater left by a huge explosion about 10 million years ago, now fed by underwater springs.
St Front itself was gearing up for the arrival of the women's circuit of the Tour de France. A handful of policemen, immaculate in navy uniforms with black trouser stripes and tinted mirror shades, were holding back a surging, restless mob of children from the nearby colonie de vacances. When the cyclists finally appeared, they passed in such a tight knot that the blur of coloured Lycra and glinting chrome flashed by in just a couple of seconds, and the village promptly lapsed back into its normal stupor.
Most memorable of all was the capital of the departement, Le Puy- en-Velay, a town draped over the remains of a giant volcanic crater. Above the carpet of red-tiled roofs rose a couple of spiky volcanic plugs. Atop one needle, the 270ft Rocher d'Aiguilhe, perched a Romanesque chapel, reached by a flight of steps giddyingly cut into the rock.
A chunkier rock towered above the Romanesque arches of the cathedral, and was crowned by a pink, 52ft statue of the Virgin and Child. We climbed the stairway up the rock to the foot of the statue. Hinged windows opened in the robes of the hollow Virgin, rather like the doors on an Advent calendar. A plaque explained that the iron lady was erected in 1859 and weighed 110 tonnes. She was born of the redeeming, transforming power of fire: her materials, 213 cannons captured at Sevastopol during the Crimean War and smelted down.
I climbed through the doorway, and up the staircase that spiralled heavenwards through her body of bolted panels. Generations of visitors had written, painted and scored their prayers, hopes and pleas on the Virgin's insides: "Please Mary," said one, "may my sister get on better with her boyfriend." "Look after us, our children, great-grandchildren and all the others." "Next time I come to see you," confided another, "it will be because I'm back with my lover." And underneath: "I'm with my lover now, together here. Look after us."
Just below her crown, I peered out of one of the hatches, down to the foot of the rock and the cemetery below, and the tombstones that seemed to be ranged in rows, gazing upward. I looked out over the sea of roofs blanketing the floor of the old volcanic crater, and tried to imagine the searing heat and all-consuming fire that once roared under the streets, shops and houses of the town.
VFB Holidays (01242 240340, www.vfbholidays. co.uk) has a handful of gites in the Auvergne; the two-bedroom property in Bigorre costs from pounds 631 fora week in June, including ferry crossing (up to pounds 829 in August).

*
Thursday, April 12, 2001, p. 13
Refugees trying to shelter from Vesuvius were fried alive by volcanic ash
David Derbyshire Science Correspondent
AFTER 12 hours huddled in the beachside boat houses, the refugees from Herculaneum had probably assumed that the worst was over.
Vesuvius had been erupting all day and, apart from the hail of pumice, there seemed to be no obvious danger.
Yet as the 300 men, women and children sat in the semi-darkness debating whether to return to their homes or flee down the coast, a scorching cloud of superheated volcanic ash burst into the crowded shelters. They were instantly fried alive.
More than 1,900 years later archaeologists have learnt how some of the townsfolk died. In Nature today they report on an analysis of 30 skeletons excavated in the 1980s and 1990s.
The people of Herculaneum were unaware that their town, a resort for wealthy Romans, was in the shadow of an active volcano. Vesuvius had not erupted for centuries and the series of earthquakes 17 years before had not been linked to it.
Then, in 79AD, explosions began the best-documented eruption of antiquity. For 12 hours, according to Pliny, the volcano sent up a column of ash and hot gas and hurled out hot stones and pumice.
Most of the 4,000 to 5,000 inhabitants appear to have evacuated the city. Since the first excavations in the 18th century, few bodies have been found in Herculaneum.
Many fled to the beach, probably to escape by boat. Others waited in 12 boat huts, each about 100ft square.
The study of their remains shows that the column of gas and ash from the volcano collapsed, sending a 500C pyrosclastic surge through the town and to the waterfront. The cloud dropped down the 60ft cliff and blasted the shelters.
The relaxed postures of the skeletons suggest that they died instantly from heat shock and not suffocation. The hot cloud vaporised their flesh and then covered their remains with volcanic ash.
A team led by Dr Alberto Incoronato, of the University of Naples Federico II, studied 80 skeletons taken from ash that had solidified. These showed no signs of a "voluntary self-protective reaction or agony contortions, indicating that their vital organs must have stopped within a shorter time than the conscious reaction time.
"The cloud was a mixture of hot gas and ash," he said yesterday. "It caused little damage in the town itself but killed these people instantly."
The position of the victims suggested that the ash expanded slightly and then deflated, becoming denser and smothering the remains. Some people had fractures and holes blown into their skulls by the heat. The patterns of cracks in tooth enamel and patterns in the bones suggest 500C temperatures.
Dr Pier Petrone, a co-author of the study, said: "It is the first time that there is the possibility to study a group of people who did not die from illness or age. It is a cross section of a living population."
The victims were mostly young adults or children and babies, he added. The boat chambers were crowded, with one containing more than 40 skeletons.
Herculaneum was a favoured holiday destinations of Romans. Merchants and landowners often had second homes in the shadow of Vesuvius. Most workers in the towns were employed in agriculture, fishing or trade industries.

*
Sunday, March 4, 2001, p. 03
Far from the tanning crowd weekend to remember San Roque David Sandhu feared that Tenerife was going to be mostly sun, sea and sangria, but a few hours in the lap of luxury and a trip up Mount Teide showed him that this Canary Island can also be cool
David Sandhu
His mother-in-law, my fellow guest assured me in a conspiratorial whisper that suggested much more, was "a particularly fastidious woman". But, try as she undoubtedly did, she had found nothing to fault the San Roque, a converted 17th-century mansion-turned- boutique-retreat in the sleepy fishing hamlet of Garachico, in the western half of Tenerife.
Once owned by the de Ponte family (Cristobal de Ponte, a banker from Genoa, established Garachico in 1496), the abandoned building has been lovingly renovated by Dominique Carayon, a French hotelier. With the help of his family and a local architect, Carayon has fashioned a distinctive hideaway: a 20-room hotel where contemporary art and furniture (including Le Corbusier and Mies van de Rohe classics) are set within the warm, earthy tones of the mansion. Huge Jacuzzis are included in the eclectic loft-style suites, and everyone - staff as well as guests - appears serenely relaxed. "We want the atmosphere here to be informal," Carayon says. And it is - you can have breakfast at 2pm.
Though it is informal, it is still luxurious. At dinner, I descended a huge stone stairway into a candlelit courtyard and tucked into grouper served with papas arrugadas (salted potatoes) and mojo (a mildly spicy sauce), and white wine from nearby Icod de los Vinos. This was Tenerife - but not as I knew it.
My sun-starved body had brought me here on a quest for fast-track late winter sunshine, but I had several prejudices to address: could the Canaries, only four hours' flying time from gloomy Gatwick, really be hot? Would it make a relaxing long weekend destination? Would I end up sandwiched between Millwall tattoos and dental-floss bikinis on a fake beach? Answers: yes, yes and yes!
Following a Saturday morning scheduled flight with GB Airways, from Gatwick, the first blast of sunshine kicked off a serotonin rush that lasted throughout my anti-clockwise drive around the island to Garachico.
Tenerife, the largest - and highest - of the Canary Islands, features a mountainous ridge stretching across the island from north- east to south-west. 
At its centre is Mount Teide, the world's third biggest volcano, which acts as a climatic barrier between the verdant north and the arid south.
Garachico ("Little Rock") was once Tenerife's principal port, where steamers, bound for England, picked up wine, until a volcanic eruption engulfed the port in lava and ash in 1706. The volcanic treacle remains, embalming the town in a strange time warp; nearby, deserted black sand bays are insulated by walls of solidified lava.
Garachico struggled to recover from the catastrophe and many buildings were rebuilt, including the monasteries of San Francisco and Santo Domingo, and the residential palace of the Marques de la Quinta Roja.
By day, this beautifully preserved, friendly village attracts a scattering of day-trippers. By night, the upmarket clientele of the San Roque (the only hotel in Garachico) has the place virtually to itself - although, a few laid-back fish restaurants aside, there is little that can be called nightlife.
As part of the Isla Baja region, currently being promoted as the "secret Tenerife" (encouragingly, there are strict restrictions on the number of hotel beds permitted), Garachico makes an excellent base for exploring the island.
The 25-mile ascent up Mount Teide through Teide National Park was no ordinary Sunday afternoon drive. It certainly had its scary moments (the number of ambulances squeezing past was hardly reassuring) and I wouldn't recommend it in rainy conditions.
Teide is a shield volcano, characterised by both its size and broad cone shape - and it remains active, having last blown its top in 1909. As Spain's largest peak, Teide stands 12,195ft above sea level, a super volcano formed by the eruptions of several others. Its snow-capped tip (a crater more than eight miles wide) can be seen from most parts of the island.
I stopped off at regular intervals to wander across a lunar landscape that best resembled a sci-fi film set; the almost brutal scenery features multi-layered lava flows and bizarre rock formations sculpted by the winds that whistle across the sandy plains. Amazingly, some plant life (mostly Macronesian in origin) survives in this harsh climate, including the El Teide broom and Canary cedar and pine trees. The Teide violet is the only plant to grow at the highest altitude.
Although the wind did not seem excessively strong, the teleferico cable-car ride (that would have lifted me the final 3,280ft to the crater within eight minutes) was closed. An anti-climax, although, after such an exhilarating journey, not too disappointing.
After a bowl of watercress soup (a Canarian speciality) at the Teleferico restaurant, I headed down to Puerto de la Cruz, the island's original tourist resort. Acclimatising to brochureland Tenerife,I sipped an ice-cold
Dorada beer as holidaymakers strolled down the promenade.
On Monday morning I battled with aggressive traffic en route to Santa Cruz, Tenerife's capital and one of Spain's busiest ports. On the shore, in the city's former industrial quarter, a spaceship appeared to have landed. The Tenerife Auditorio, designed by the Valencian architect Santiago Calatrava, is an outlandish structure conceived as a statement for 21st-century Tenerife. After four years' construction, this building, more sculpture than architecture, is almost finished; from 2002, it will host music, dance, drama and opera.
Also located in the industrial quarter is the El Tanque cultural centre; housed within an enormous oil tanker drum, 165ft in diameter and 66ft in height, it provides astonishing acoustics. With a reverb of approximately 17 seconds, El Tanque hosts cacophonously avant- garde performances that are certain to make a lasting impression.
With my return flight scheduled for late Tuesday afternoon, there might have been time to explore Teno, a protected national area featuring a volcanic landscape with narrow ravines, marine cliffs, a Tertiary age forest and a wealth of indigenous flora.
But I chose to do something that the vast majority of Tenerife's visitors choose to do - head for the imported Saharan sand beaches. Playa de las Teresitas could have been almost any Mediterranean resort in early summer.
Homer believed that the Canaries were Elysium, a place where the righteous spent their afterlife, and thereafter they have been known as the "Fortunate Islands". Whether the suncream-lathering masses of Tenerife's "international" resorts realise how fortunate they are to visit this topographically diverse island, is another matter.
essentials
Getting there
British Airways (0845 773 3377) has three flights (operated by GB Airways) a week from London Gatwick to Tenerife, from pounds 209 return.
Staying there
Doubles at Hotel San Roque from pounds 120; from pounds 150 for a suite. Further information and UK reservations from Design Hotels (0800 169 8817; 
www.designhotels.com).
Recommended reading
Canary Islands (Lonely Planet,pounds 8.99).
What it costs for two
Flights pounds 418
Three nights' accommodation (suite) pounds 450
Lunches pounds 54
Dinners at San Roque pounds 90
Car hire pounds 45
Total pounds 1,057

*
Sunday, February 25, 2001, p. 11
Hotspots Tim Jepson suggests some other places to see the lava flow
Tim Jepson
The Caribbean
The eastern Caribbean has about 20 active volcanoes, including 10 on Dominica, where the highlight is the world's second-largest "boiling lake" (New Zealand has the largest). On Martinique you can climb the dormant Mont Pelee (40,000 people were killed when it erupted in 1902), and on St Vincent follow a trail to the 700ft deep and one-mile wide crater of La Soufriere. Further information from the Grenadines Tourist Board (020 7937 6570; www.svgtourism). Caribbean Experience (020 7602 4021; www.caribbean-ex.co.uk) offers tailor-made packages, flights and hotels in the region.
Costa Rica
Sunvil Discovery (020 8758 4774; www.sunvil.co.uk) offers independent fly-drive packages with suggested itineraries - including Volcan Poas (8,870ft), a bubbling and steaming cauldron - and two 10- night guided tours (departing on June 11 and Oct 8) visiting a range of sights including Volcan Arenal (5,357ft), Central America's most active volcano. The price is pounds 1,280 and includes flights, transfers, accommodation, excursions and some meals.
Chile
Journey Latin America (020 8747 8315; www.
journeylatinamerica.co.uk) offers add-on excursions to Chile's principal volcanic regions. A two-night trip in the north of the country to the Lauca National Park and Lake Chungara volcanoes costs from pounds 195. Two nights' "soft adventure" to southern Chile's Lake District volcanoes costs from pounds 252 and includes a day's riding and day's rafting in the shadow of the Calbuco, Puntiagardo and Osorno volcanoes.
Ecuador
Exodus (020 8675 5550, brochure line 020 8673 0859; www.exodus.co.uk) has an 18-day Avenue of the Volcanoes trek, which combines cultural highlights with walks around some of South America's premier volcano country. The trip includes the chance to climb Cotopaxi (19,347ft), the world's second highest active volcano (a road runs to 15,750ft). It costs from pounds 1,645, including flights, most meals and a mixture of accommodation in hotels, tents and mountain 
huts.
Hawaii
Hawaii has two main active volcanoes, Mauna Loa and Kilauea, both of which lie within the Volcanoes National Park, one of the world's safest places to observe volcanic activity. Hawaiian specialists North America Travel Service (0113 398 3003; www.northamericatravelservice.
co.uk) offers a three-day excursion from Honolulu staying at Volcano House at the heart of the park from pounds 195, including internal flights and accommodation.
Other operators include Jetlife (01322 614801; www.jetlife.co.uk) and Page & Moy (0870 010 6456; www.page-moy). Further information: Hawaii Visitors Bureau (020 8941 4009; www.gohawaii.com).
Nicaragua
Journey Latin America (see above) has a 23-day "Alcion" tour that takes in most of Central America's volcanic spine, including Baru (Panama), Arenal (Costa Rica), and Masaya, Concepcion and Madera (Nicaragua). The trip cost from pounds 1,673 and includes flights, all transfers, accommodation and excursions.
Italy
Italy boasts Europe's highest active volcano in Mount Etna (10,902ft) and - in Vesuvius - the one that will cause the most damage when (not if) it next erupts. Roads lead part way up Vesuvius - the final haul to the 4,200ft summit involves a 30-minute climb. On Etna, a cable car runs to 7,875ft, where you can walk or join 4WD vehicles that take you as close to the summit as current volcanic activity allows. Eruptions can also be observed on Stromboli in the Aeolian Islands off the Sicilian coast. Contact Magic of Italy (08700 270500) for details of packages to Naples (for Vesuvius), Taormina (for Etna) and the Aeolian Islands.
New Zealand
The area around Rotorua on the North Island is a hotbed of volcanic activity - geysers, steaming fissures and bubbling pools. For tailor-made itineraries that include the area, contact Bridge the World (0870 444 7474; www.bridgetheworld.com) or Tailor Made Travel (01386 712050; www.tailor-made.co.uk). Both companies can also book local tours, walks, 4WD expeditions and helicopter flights.
Russia
Explore (01252 760100; www.exploreworldwide.com) has an 18-day Volcanoes of Kamchatka walking trip to the Kamchatka peninsula off the east coast of Siberia. Bathe in hot pools, take helicopter rides over the area, trek through pristine countryside - still the haunt of brown bears - and climb active volcanoes. The trip costs from pounds 2,095 (with departures July 12, 26 and Aug 9, 23), including flights, camping and hotel accommodation and most food. Exodus (see above) has a similar trip costing pounds 2,495 that departs on Aug 22.

*
Saturday, January 20, 2001, p. 11
Best buys after the big bang Volcanic eruptions caused house prices on Montserrat to plummet. Now they are rising again- so get in quick, says Quentin Letts
QUENTIN LETTS
The golf course has been covered by a mudslide and the former capital is a modern Pompeii, buried under hard volcanic dust. Welcome to the Caribbean island of Montserrat. Or, as they say at the Foreign Office since half this dependent territory was destroyed by a volcano: "You're welcome to it - what's left."
But suddenly the Montserrat property market is perkier. The Soufriere Hills volcano, which erupted from 1995 to 1997, has started to cool. The autumn hurricane season passed without incident. And more to the point, locals report the return of the "snowbirds" - the prosperous north Americans who rent and buy in Montserrat to escape the cold winters back home.
Paula Dutcher, of West Indies Real Estate, says: "As you would expect of a small island with a live volcano, sales have not exactly boomed in the past few years. But they are now improving."
In 1997, a few villas sold for as little as 10 per cent of their values before the eruption. Most houses were coated in ash and many were buckled out of shape or burnt. Now, vegetation is growing back, water and electricity supplies have resumed and the climatic seasons have returned to pre-eruption patterns. Prices have yet to reach pre- 1995 levels, but the days of 10 per cent "firesales" have gone.
For US $370,000 ( pounds 255,000) - all transactions are conducted in dollars - you can pick up The Anchorage,
a three-bedroom villa with mahogany trees in its third-of-an-acre garden.
At $525,000 ( pounds 370,000) there is Villa Maurtone, a family house with views towards the neighbouring island of Nevis. Caribbean View, in the Woodlands Bay area, has three double bedrooms, handsome reception space, a pool patio/deck and gardens, all for $295,000 ( pounds 207,000). And at $205,000 ( pounds 145,000), West Indies Real Estate offers another Woodlands house called Topaz: three bedrooms, a small swimming pool and garden gazebo.
The south and east of the island were badly damaged by the volcano and remain so, but the north and west are back to near normal. Montserrat is 13 miles long and three miles wide. Two thirds of the island have been put out of bounds in an "exclusion zone" since the volcano blew.
Most of the expat buyers have been Americans, Britons and Canadians. "They are professional people who are thinking of retiring here in a few years' time but buying now while prices are good," says one local. "We have also had artists and musicians, a bit like the old days when Elton John, Sting and the Rolling Stones used to record their music at George Martin's studios."
Sales are sometimes the result of impulsiveness. One recent buyer was a tourist who saw a house he liked, went to a local nightclub and signed on the bonnet of a car by torchlight as the sun was coming up at 5am, just as his helicopter was preparing to take him off the island.
John Renton, a London architect who developed the Isles Bay Plantation in the early 1990s, recently returned from 10 days on the island. "It is beginning to look its beautiful self again," he says. "There are about 1,500 private villas on the island and, given that the population is now only 4,500, that indicates the proportion of private investment. The Montserrat government is starting to appreciate the contribution villa owners make
to the economy."
All seven houses that Mr Renton designed and sold on Montserrat, remain in the hands of their original buyers. Derek Layton, a Gloucestershire scientist, owns a four-bedroom house in the Old Towne area. "We are sometimes asked why we stayed `loyal' to the island after the eruption," he says. "The answer is that we love Montserrat and its people and want to help them out with their sense of frustration at the British government. Conditions are slowly improving, but there is a shortage of skilled labour."
The BBC recently broadcast
a downbeat report on the island's prospects and there are dark theories that some Montserrat politicians are happy to see the bad news spread, as it might keep property prices down and allow them to buy up houses themselves.
Most villas are in the plantation style, with deep verandahs and swimming pools. 
A few are air-conditioned but most have high ceilings and fans - and there is almost always a breeze on the island.
Michael, a retired Brit who prefers to keep his surname private, points out a few snags: "Local records of who owns land are not exact, so with plots of land you need to be careful about the right of the vendor to sell it." Plots big enough to build a villa cost about US $25,000 ( pounds 17,500), but building supplies are not easy to secure.
Putative buyers will not be food snobs: Montserratian cooking is widely accepted to be dismal. Its drink cannot be faulted, however. Apart from the few little restaurants and beach bars, it has some excellent rum shops such as Gary's Wide Awake Bar in Salem. Political discussions laced with reggae flow on into the night.
Transport off the island is a problem, with an intermittent helicopter service and two ferries a day. Do not move here if you have a medical condition that might necessitate being rushed to a major hospital. Air links might improve, however, if rumours of a new airport come to anything.
"The scientists tell us that the plates under the volcano are beginning to close and that it might be sealing itself," says Mr Renton. "Rental inquiries are bouncing back and that always leads to people buying houses."
If you hanker for a West Indies bolthole where you can watch whales frolicking in the Caribbean Sea and pelicans gorging on fish, Montserrat could be a good place to look - provided you are brave, and quick.
Contact West Indies Real Estate on 00 1 664 491 8666; www.wirealest.com

*
Wednesday, December 20, 2000, p. 08
40,000 abandon their homes under the volcano
Ronald Buchanan in Mexico City
THE Mexican army evacuated 40,000 people from their homes yesterday after Popocateptl, the active volcano on the edge of Mexico City, erupted twice.
The 18,000ft volcano threw rocks 18in in diameter up to 650ft into the air, spewing debris across a six-mile radius. A huge plume of incandescent lava was visible from 40 miles away.
President Vicente Fox pleaded for calm, but added: "We remain on maximum alert."
After the first eruption on Monday night 3,000 troops from the army and federal police were called in and began moving the surrounding inhabitants to school shelters and town halls. The only reported casualty was a 65-year-old man who died from a heart attack.
Oscar Navarro, the head of civil defence, said: "People love the volcano. Its volcanic dust has made the earth fertile. They are understandably reluctant to leave their crops and their animals."
The Interior Minister, Santiago Creel, said the volcano, known as Popo, remained unstable. He added: "It's like a pressure cooker."
Servando de la Cruz, a vulcanologist at the National University, said the eruption was the greatest since before the Spanish Conquistadors arrived about 500 years ago.
Popo, whose name in the Aztec tongue means Old Smoky, began emitting smoke and ash about six years ago. Few nearby residents heeded earlier calls to evacuate the area as the lava dome grew to three times its usual size.
Popo was used as the backdrop for Malcolm Lowry's drunken British consul in his novel Under The Volcano. Scientists believe that the last big eruption happened about AD 800.

<#IHT>
*
Monday, September 16, 2002, p. 8
IN OUR PAGES: 100, 75 AND 50 YEARS AGO 1952: Earth's Newest Volcano
SAN DIEGO, California: Scientists reported the presence of the earth's newest volcano yesterday [Sept. 15] on San Benedicto, a tiny uninhabited island 780 miles south of here. The volcano was viewed by scientists from an Air Force B26. Dr. Robert Dietz reported the volcano was sending up smoke and ash with a strong sulphur odor, indicating it was in the later stages of its initial eruption. Scientists said the cone is bright yellow in color and has risen to a height of 1,050 feet.

*
Friday, September 6, 2002, p. 8
IN OUR PAGES: 100, 75 AND 50 YEARS AGO 
1902: Volcano Kills Thousands
NEW YORK: Coincident with the report of the loss of 2,000 lives by a fresh eruption of the Montagne Pelee, the Herald has received a graphic despatch from Pointe-a-Pitre, Guadeloupe. The panic there has in no manner abated. It is believed that Martinique is doomed to total destruction and the fear still prevails that, when the catastrophe comes, Guadeloupe will be visited by an all-destructive tidal wave. Colonel Lecoeur has reported his opinion that the entire island of Martinique will have to be abandoned.

*
Wednesday, July 10, 2002, p. 6
IN OUR PAGES: 100, 75 AND 50 YEARS AGO 
1927: Volcano Terror in Hawaii
HILO, Hawaii: Terror seized Hilo as the volcano Kiliauea, altitude 4,200 feet, erupted today [July 8.] Earlier eruptions, which constituted a dreaded warning, caused many natives to risk their lives and cast berries into the smoking crater as an offering to Pele, goddess of volcanos. An imposing sight was witnessed when the eruption sent four fountains of fire 125 feet into the air, casting an infernal glow over the surrounding pineapple plantations. A slight earthquake accompanied the eruption.

*
Tuesday, May 28, 2002, p. 8
IN OUR PAGES: 100, 75 AND 50 YEARS AGO 
1902: Mont Pelee Erupts Again
FORT-DE-FRANCE, Martinique: The volcano is again in eruption. Huge inky black clouds are rolling over Fort-de-France in great masses, with peculiar lightning flashes playing in them. The inhabitants are flocking into the square of the town. Fort-de- France is not in danger from the volcano, but there is considerable apprehension of panic ensuing in case the grayish-yellow cloud should reach here in the nighttime and the ashes and stones begin to fall. There are no noises from the Montagne Pelee at present.

*
Friday, May 10, 2002, p. 6
IN OUR PAGES: 100, 75 AND 50 YEARS AGO 
1902: Wiped Out of Existence
PARIS: St. Pierre, Martinique, with 26,000 inhabitants and its shipping, wiped out of existence! This is the news that comes from the French West Indian island. It is a disaster such as has had no parallel since Pompeii and Herculaneum were buried in volcanic fire from Vesuvius, 1,823 years ago. St. Pierre was literally destroyed, people and all, by a mass of fire and boiling thrown up from Mont Pelee, the volcano which overhangs the site of the city. The total loss of life in all parts of Martinique is now estimated at 40,000.

*
Wednesday, May 9, 2001, p. 1
Pinatubo: 10 Years Later Philippine Eruption Snuffed Out Tribe's Way of Life
Thomas Fuller
PATALBATO, Philippines - The sky darkened and the ground shook. It sounded like a "stampede of 100,000 animals," said a Filipino who witnessed it.
When Mount Pinatubo erupted 10 years ago, it spewed a column of ash 40 kilometers (25 miles) into the sky. Fist-sized rocks and sand rained down here for weeks, blanketing the area with a moon-like layer of ash that stretched for dozens of kilometers, a "giant sand trap," in the words of a resident. The eruption, on June 15, 1991, was the second biggest of the 20th century, according to the U.S. Geological Survey. Nearly 1,000 people were crushed by collapsing roofs or swept away by mud slides.
The eruption's effects were felt around the globe: Like a giant aerosol can, the volcano sent a dense cloud of climate-changing gases into the atmosphere. By blocking heat from the sun, scientists say, the cloud of gases lowered the ground temperature of the earth by about half a degree Celsius.
A decade later, there are signs both of rejuvenation and misery in the shadow of Pinatubo. The "sand trap" has sprouted green. Most people, especially city dwellers, have brought normality back into their lives.
Some found ingenious ways to turn tragedy into opportunity. Ash was cleared and sold to construction companies that use it as a building material. Dump trucks took the ash to Manila, a two-hour drive to the south.
Pumice stones that once rained from the sky were gathered and sold by the bag. They have a wide range of uses from cosmetics to carpentry; residents say they are used to help in the process of stone-washing jeans.
Travel agencies offered tours of Pinatubo's crater and the large lake that now sits in the middle of it. The mountain is 300 meters (1,000 feet) shorter than it was before the eruption, a testament to the fact that the volcano literally blew its top.
But for a group of mountain-dwelling people who knew the volcano best who lived on its slopes and hunted in its jungles recovery and reconstruction have been slow, if at all.
The eruption marked the end of a lifestyle for them, one their ancestors pursued for hundreds, if not thousands, of years. They are known as Aeta, a small aboriginal tribe who numbered about 60,000 before the eruption. The Aeta are distinct from most Filipinos because of their starkly different features. They look more African than Asian. They called themselves highlanders and for good reason: they rarely mixed with the people of the valleys and the cities.
When the mountain began to smoke and tremble 10 years ago, many Aeta fled from the hills around Pinatubo and were evacuated to distant resettlement camps.
Ramon and Josefina Diaz, an Aeta couple in their 40s, were taken by dump truck from the town of Patalpinto, where Mr. Diaz was the village chief. They left behind their thatch house, their farm tools and their livestock two water buffalo, three pigs and more than 100 chickens.
In the confusion of the evacuation two of their nine children were also left behind in the village. Both perished.
The village today is buried under so much ash that Mr. Diaz says it would be impossible to excavate it.
Buried, too, is a lifestyle they will probably never see again. Before the eruption, they hunted wild boar, deer, mountain cats and a variety of birds. They grew mountain rice, sweet potatoes, bananas, beans and other root crops.
Those who visited the Aeta tribes in their habitat described it as a veritable Eden. There was spring water in the jungles, and the streams were filled with fish, electric eels and fresh-water shrimp. With nature so bountiful, there was very little use for money.
Many Aeta today say they yearn to return to Pinatubo's slopes, to resume the lives they had before the eruption. But the mountain, they say, does not seem to want them back. The sandy soil is arid and hostile to crops. Mountain rice, their dietary staple, turns yellow and withers when planted in the ash.
Andres Bondoc, an Aeta villager in San Martin, northeast of Pinatubo, says even when crops successfully ripen, they are often eaten by rats, a problem that they never had before the eruption.
"Maybe after the eruption the rats ran down here to escape," Mr. Bondoc said, attempting to explain the scourge.
In the jungles, the huge trees that once provided shelter and shade are gone, replaced by shrubs and other plants with no practical uses. Many banana trees have grown back, but the Aeta say they cannot live off those alone.
Mr. Bondoc shows a visitor a bow and three disused arrows, each with its own, distinctive arrowhead: one for hunting lizard, one for birds and the most elaborate for wild boar. Animals have returned to the jungles, he says, but not in the same numbers as before the eruption.
Today, many Aeta are stuck in resettlement areas that resemble refugee camps. Mr. Diaz, who lives in such a camp, says every year his neighbors die of measles, chicken pox and diarrhea, diseases they rarely encountered before the eruption.
When they lived in the jungles, they wore loin clothes and sarongs. Today many wear Western-style clothes, ill-fitting government hand-outs that hang on their skinny frames like rags.
In the decade since the eruption, the government has provided workshops for the Aeta, teaching them how to make handicrafts from materials in the jungle. But Mrs. Diaz, who attended such a workshop, says making handicrafts is impractical.
"How can you go into the jungle to get materials for baskets when you have nothing to eat?" she asks.
Families here support themselves by finding banana blossoms in the jungle and selling them or bartering them with local traders for rice. A big bag of the blossoms, which are used in Philippine cooking, sells for between $1 and $2.
Because most Aeta are illiterate, finding jobs in cities or towns is difficult. 
They lack the job skills of lowlanders.
"They can't compete," said Guy Hilbero, a local official who has defended the native land rights of the Aeta. "All they can do is be a janitor or a groundskeeper. Even being a housekeeper they sometimes have trouble with." It could be that the eruption of Pinatubo accelerated the inevitable. The nomadic, wild lifestyle of the Aeta was perhaps destined to clash with technology and development.
This is no consolation to Mr. and Mrs. Diaz. "Aeta people before were like a broom," Mr. Diaz said, "all bundled together. Everybody shared everything. We lived together."

*
Wednesday, March 15, 2000, p. 20
Prince Andrew of Britain ventured into the outskirts of Montserrat's danger zone a barren area coated by gray ash where a volcano has scarred more than half of the verdant British Caribbean island. It is Andrew's third visit since the Soufriere Hills volcano roared to life in 1995, forcing an evacuation of the capital, Plymouth. "It's a horrendous devastation. It's a great sadness to see a town like that," Andrew said. Scientists said last year that the volcano was settling down, but a new string of explosions since July has dashed those hopes.

*
Friday, June 25, 1999 10
The Wonder of the Post-Apocalyptic Mount Pinatubo
Katherine Tanko
ANGELES CITY, Philippines
"The amazing thing about Pinatubo," Owen said, "is that it's continually changing." Scooping up a handful of lahar, the fine- grained mixture of ash and stone ejected from Pinatubo during its headline-grabbing eruption, he explained how wind and rain constantly reshape Pinatubo's post-apocalyptic landscape. 
"Every time I climb it, it's completely different."
But then, Pinatubo is not your average volcano. It has been only eight years since this once little-known mountain erupted in a fit of volcanic fury that made Mount Saint Helens look like a backdoor barbecue. Over three days in June 1991, Pinatubo blasted 10 billion cubic meters of debris 40 kilometers (25 miles) into the stratosphere, turning day into night and Manila, 90 kilometers to the south, into a giant ashtray. By the time it was over, hundreds of people had died, thousands had been evacuated and the landscape around Pinatubo had been transformed forever.
So when I heard that you can now climb all the way to Pinatubo's crater, I started packing my bags. It is rare to come across a volcano like Pinatubo: Its post-eruption landscape is dramatic, unique and utterly wild. Yet it is easy to get to, just a short drive west of Angeles City, giving anyone with a sturdy pair of boots the chance to explore nature in the raw. To get to Pinatubo's crater and back in one day, we had to set out early. Owen, our guide, picked us up at 4 A.M. for the two-hour drive to the start of the trail on the northern slope. It was just starting to get light when we pulled up beside a makeshift camp of Aetas the highland people who lived on the slopes of Pinatubo before the blast near the start of the trail. The eruption of Pinatubo was a catastrophe for the Aetas. These dignified people have long preferred an independent life on Pinatubo's slopes to the rat race of the lowlands a place they consider synonymous with human corruption. Hundreds of them were killed in the eruption, when they preferred to hide in caves rather than be evacuated. Others escaped a fiery end only to die from measles and other lowland diseases in resettlement camps. Some, like this group, have moved back to the wilderness of Pinatubo, living as close as they can to their former homes. Here on this remote patch of land, they build new houses, grow their own food and wait for the day the mountain will be able to support them again. We set out along a wide, flat riverbed. At the tail-end of the dry season the river was little more than a shallow ribbon of fast flowing water; at the height of the wet it can become a raging current and a conduit for lahar slides. The grassy banks that flanked us at the outset disappeared and we soon found ourselves wandering through a surreal moonscape of ash. Enormous cliffs of lahar towered a hundred meters above us, their surfaces eroded into a sculpture of ashen steeples and spires. 
The entire canyon was a mix of God meets Gaudi, an ash-covered badlands utterly devoid of life. At the mercy of typhoons and monsoons, these fragile canyons are about as permanent as an ice sculpture in the Sahara. It's the sheer volume of lahar that makes Pinatubo so spectacular and so deadly. At the Philippine Institute of Volcanology and Seismology's Pinatubo Observatory, the resident volcanologist, Jaime Sincioco, estimates that about 7 billion cubic meters of debris more than 200 meters thick, were deposited on the volcano's slopes. "When Mount Saint Helens erupted, pyroclastic flows only went down one side of the volcano," he said, "With Pinatubo it was different." Lahar flowed down eight major drainage channels, some passing through towns, villages and farmland, burying entire communities in meters of stinking mud. As we neared the crater, Pinatubo's haunting, lunar landscape eventually gave way to something resembling planet Earth. We clambered over ocher and sand-colored boulders, along a tumbling freshwater stream littered with mineral-rich rocks bleeding brilliant shades of green and red. Here, too, were the first signs of life returning to Pinatubo's slopes: saplings, wild grass and tadpoles darting about in shallow pools of water. After four hours we finally arrived at the crater, a ring of jagged cliffs enveloping a shimmering turquoise lake. We had been advised not to swim in the water because of its high acidity, but no one in our group could resist a dip. The water was warm and as we paddled out into the lake we could see steam rising from smoking vents on the far shore. Floating above the volcano's gaping mouth, gateway to the planet's fury, there was now only silence. The next day we drove to Bacolor, a small town southeast of the volcano. Still living in fear Here residents still live in fear of the lahar slides that have engulfed the town half a dozen times since 1991. Driving into town we were greeted by the eerie sight of rooftops poking out of the ground and the 18th-century church of San Guillermo half buried in the earth. "This was all farmland once," said the parish priest, Father Nestor Tayag, as he surveyed the barren land covered in wild grass that now surrounds the village. The ground is useless now, although locals have had some success growing peanuts and a few other plants. A handful of new homes all built on stilts dotted the bleak horizon. "As you can see," he said, "we are not victims, we are survivors." There were other casualties as well. The Americans abandoned their military bases buried beneath a foot of ash at Clark and Subic Bay. Angeles City, the town that grew rich catering to the off-duty needs of Clark's servicemen, went into an economic nosedive. Since then, Clark has slowly found its feet as an industrial park and leisure zone while Angeles has begun catering to the new breed of foreigner in town: tourists. "It used to be a real honky-tonk town," Owen said as we cruised the golden mile of restaurants, bars and massage parlors many either closed down or boarded up that Angeles was famous for. "When the Americans were here, they'd come to town and blow their whole week's pay," Owen explained, "but the tourists that come here now, they don't have that kind of money. Many are backpackers traveling on tight budgets. So now they call Angeles Kuripot Town, or Tightwad Town." Locals have been slow to respond to the changing market, however, and it will be some time before the bars beloved of GIs are replaced by something more suitable for trekkers and nature lovers. An excellent base On the plus side, years of catering to American palates has left Angeles with an excellent range of hotels, shops and international restaurants, making it an ideal base for a Pinatubo Trek. Hotel prices range from $5 to $40. The Holiday Inn on Clark Field ($120; tel: 632-845-1888) is a quieter, greener place to stay, but its location on the far side of Clark means getting around is difficult unless you have your own vehicle. Many hotels will arrange Pinatubo treks. Most companies charge around $40 a person for the one day trip, including pick up and drop off at your hotel. Overnight trips start at $70 including food, water and camping gear. We arranged our trip with Summit Tours (tel: 045- 892-5779); Dale City Tours (045-887-1825) offers similar rates, or contact the Philippine Department of Tourism (045-961-2665) for more information. Treks are restricted to the dry season from October to April. In the wet, lahar slides and the risk of secondary explosions make trekking hazardous. But it's worth making the effort to go now, before too many more rainy seasons change Pinatubo's ethereal landscape again. Katherine Tanko is a journalist who travels frequently in Asia.

<#FT>
*
4 Nov 1993, page 16 
Technology: Taming the volcanoes - Improved forecasting techniques are making it easier to predict eruptions
By VICTORIA GRIFFITH

Volcanoes, which spit ash, ooze lava and create darkness in the middle ofthe day, are impressive displays of nature's restlessness. They are alsolife-threatening: more than 28,500 people died from eruptions during the1980s. They can cause millions of dollars in property damage and bringindustrial activity to a grinding halt.New technology to improve the accuracy of eruption forecasts is helping tominimise the devastation volcanoes can cause. After the Nevado del Ruizeruption killed nearly 25,000 people in Colombia in 1986, the US governmentbegan taking volcanic forecasting seriously. The US Geological Survey, whichtracks volcanic activity around the world, was infused with new funds tocreate a detailed database and update its techniques.The new technology will not only help to save thousands of lives, it mayalso save millions of dollars. According to the Aviation Safety Journal,more than 60 aircraft have been damaged by drifting clouds of volcanic ashsince 1980. The repair of a 747 aircraft damaged during the 1989 eruptionfrom Redoubt Volcano in Alaska cost Dollars 80m (Pounds 53m).The continuous eruption of Hawaii's Kilauea since 1983 has caused more thanDollars 5m in damage, much of it to properties and crops affected by theacid-bearing volcanic pollutants. Mount St Helens in Washington state wipedout thousands of acres of productive timberland.Losses from interrupted economic activity are harder to quantify, but may bemore devastating. Redoubt's eruption, for instance, caused a valuable oilstorage terminal to close for several weeks and halted most flights into andout of the region.Tourism often takes the hardest hit of all. When US geologists issuederuption warnings in California's Long Valley in 1982, the resort areaturned into a ghost town almost overnight. And the tourist-based economy ofGuadeloupe neared collapse in 1976 after an international group ofvolcanologists forecast the eruption of La Soufriere.The Long Valley and Guadeloupe incidents are tinged with bitterness sincethe predicted disasters never happened. Guadeloupe evacuated 72,000 peopleand tourists stayed away. Yet the only crisis that hit the Caribbean islandwas in the economic sphere.Scientists blame these fiascos on insufficient data. 'The identification offresh volcanic glass in the erupted ash - which seemed to indicate that thevolcano was about to erupt violently - was a mistake,' wrote Richard Fiske,a volcanologist at the Smithsonian Institution, about the incident.Volcanologists today use more sophisticated techniques. Detailed databasesare maintained on all life-threatening volcanoes around the world.High-frequency monitors to measure debris flows are now in place.Earthquakes - often the first warning of volcanic activity - are trackedwith increasing accuracy. And changes in gas composition, electricalconductivity and other clues are carefully monitored.As a result, volcanic activity can now be forecast with substantialaccuracy, often pinpointing the eruption to within days or even hours of itsactual occurrence. When Redoubt erupted in Alaska in 1989 and Pinatubo blewits top in the Philippines in 1991, volcanologists provided importantinformation, not only about the timing of the events, but also about thedirection of debris flows and ash blooms - vast clouds formed when tinypieces of lava or rock are thrown into the air.'We used information on the ash blooms (during the Redoubt eruption) to knowwhich areas to stay away from, and which were safe to fly through,' saysGreg Witter, a spokesman for Alaska Air.Companies can also take advantage of eruption forecasts to move valuableequipment out of the way, and evacuate employees from the area.'Businesses with sensitive electronics may want to shut down their airfiltration system during an ash bloom,' says Steven Brantley, publicinformation scientist with the US Geological Survey. Since ash blooms oftendrift for many miles, they can wreak havoc on property well beyond thelife-threatening zone of eruption.Volcanology can also be used for future planning. After much of its timberwas wiped out during the eruption of Mount St Helens, the paper groupWeyerhaeuser consulted experts to decide which areas should be replanted andwhich avoided as too high-risk.Not all businesses welcome the interference of volcanologists, however. InLong Valley developers have refused to heed warnings in land use planning.'We've had mixed results, because we can't force people to follow ouradvice,' says Daniel Miller, a geologist with the US Geological Survey.'We've had a very negative and unpleasant response from businesses in LongValley. They just don't believe that they might be in a risk zone and insiston building things anywhere they please.'Developers in the region complain that the volcanologists' warnings haveresulted in higher insurance rates, limited areas of potential developmentand stoked the fears of tourists.The relationship between active volcanoes and the communities that surroundthem is not always confrontational. Kilauea has become a leading Hawaiiantourist attraction. It is considered the ideal volcano. Because the eruptionis continuous, it is seldom life-threatening and ash blooms are rare.Instead, the volcano throws up a scenic display of colourful lava, whichattracts hikers by day and creates a natural light show at night.Scientists have gleaned much useful information from the decade-longeruption.'The resorts look to us to provide information on best viewing times, whichthey pass on to the tourists,' says David Clague, scientist in charge of theHawaii Volcano Observatory at Kilauea. 'It's generally pretty tame as far asvolcano eruptions go, but it's spectacular at night because it'siridescent.'

*
30 Oct 1993, page X
Travel: Not many people know about El Salvador.
By MARK HODSON
      
TWO HUNDRED years ago, a hole appeared in the ground somewhere in western ElSalvador and a huge fountain of lava and ash spewed out to form a perfectvolcanic cone 4,000ft high. Over the years it remained almost permanentlyactive and, late in the 1950s, the government decided to build a lavishhotel on an adjoining peak with spectacular views into the crater.Just as the Hotel Montana was about to open its doors in October 1966,Izalco volcano let out one last rumble and, to this day, has remainedperfectly, stubbornly dormant. Such is the luck that has dogged the historyof El Salvador's tourist industry.In recent years, events have taken several turns for the worse, with aterrible civil war and a frail peace accord in 1992 doing little to promotethe country as a holiday destination.(...)

*
18 Sep 1993, Page XIII
Travel: Violent landscape in bubbling repose - Michael J Woods flies above the volcanoes of Rotorua, climbs into their craters and bathes in their sulphur springs
By MICHAEL J WOODS
      
HOT sulphurous steam belched from the mountainside and rose in stiflingclouds from the main crater, rolling upwards towards the rim before beingtorn to shreds and melting away to invisibility in the powerfulsouth-westerly wind.The helicopter, insignificant against this great mountain, banked over thecrater, bucking in the uplift. As it did so I stared into the volcano's evildepths to glimpse the sump of viscous grey liquid in the bottom. Only thebilious yellow of sulphur coloured the moonscape. Like iodine around awound, the sulphur had left a saffron deposit round every vent and crack.The helicopter landed on the slippery surface of the old mudflow, deeplyscored by water channels, where the wind piled in from the sea between twocliffs. This was White Island, an active volcano 31 miles off the east coastof New Zealand's North Island. Fishing boats may shelter in its lee andgannets and mutton birds may nest on its outer edges, but the interior isfar less hospitable - the living planet in the making.White Island is at one end of a volcanic region which stretches inlandsouth-west to Ruapehu volcano, 150 miles away, and contains all NewZealand's historically active volcanoes. One of its most notablemanifestations is Mount Tarawera which erupted in the early morning of June10 1886 to cause New Zealand's biggest natural disaster.We flew over it on our return from White Island, looking down into agigantic cleft 850ft deep, blasted out of the mountain's three-domed summitin a rift eruption which runs for more than 10 miles.While a helicopter ride gives you a good overview, nothing beats climbingdown into the crater, so later I was driven close to the top beforeslip-sliding down a long, steep scree slope into the crater itself.Stand still and the silence is almost overwhelming.But the earth has not finished its business here. Although my guiderepeatedly reminded me that the giant beneath Tarawera was only sleeping,there was no sign of geothermal life. Go down the hill to the south-west andcross Lake Rotomahana into Waimangu Valley and there is enough activity tosatisfy the most ardent enthusiast. And it would be harder to find one moreardent than Bradley Scott, from the volcano surveillance team of NewZealand's Institute of Geological and Nuclear Sciences, who took me there.He regularly monitors temperatures and water levels of the two lakes, FryingPan Lake and Inferno Crater Lake. As they gently steamed before us, heexplained that the two swap water via a freak underground chamber from whichit is forced as if from a subterranean pressure cooker.Over a 38-day cycle, the level of Inferno Crater Lake can vary by as much as39 feet, by far the largest such fluctuation in the world. By keeping an eyeon things here, Brad should be able to predict any further eruptions andavoid the surprise that Tarawera sprung just over a century ago. In volcanicterms that was a minor eruption. Far larger ones have taken place here inthe past, throwing out huge amounts of molten rock.Tourism based on hydrothermal activity was already growing before the 1886eruption. Displays in Rotorua museum, located in a failedturn-of-the-century bath house, explain that Europeans were then making thelong journey to New Zealand to bathe at the magnificent pink and whiteterraces which looked like two great glaciers pushing into the original LakeRotomahana, except that these were created by heat rather than cold. Theywere regarded as one of the wonders of the world in their day.The Victorians enjoyed describing these delicate silica cascades in flowerytones. The hottest, deepest pools were at the top, cooler, shallower ones atthe bottom. The topmost pools on the pink terraces contained shimmering bluewater.Sadly, the terraces were blown away during the Tarawera eruption, Bradassured me, but, to his obvious amusement, optimistic expeditions stillarrive occasionally, intent on excavating the terraces from the mud whichburied the two Maori villages of Te Ariki and Moura and partially engulfed athird during that fateful night.This last, Te Wairoa, has been excavated and can still be seen on its site,south-east of Rotorua. It was here that visitors to the terraces would stayovernight before setting out by boat or on horseback with Maori guides,often purchasing freshwater crayfish on the way to cook in the terracepools. The introduction of a cash economy meant that the destruction oftheir money-spinner was an even greater disaster for those who survived.It is still possible to enjoy a soak in the steaming opaque Polynesianpools. The acid and alkaline baths are open to the sky and at night they aredimly lit by strings of white fairy lights. The half-naked figures whichsilently came and went through the thick plumes of steam made my baths herea relaxing but surreal experience.Today there is a growing fascination with geothermal activity, and the Maoriarts and crafts institute on the edge of Rotorua is partly funded by itspopular guided visits to the boiling mud pools and geysers in its grounds.The institute fosters the craft of Maori carving.An evening at a Maori marae (meeting house), where a concert is followed bythe customary hangi (meal cooked under the ground), gives an insight intothe rituals of these people. The arriving party is treated as a rival tribeby the residents of the village and various rituals are observed.Warriors come forward with appropriately fierce threats and gestures untilthe peaceful intentions of the visitors are established. The night I went wewere approached through the darkness by a tattooed, spear-wielding, gruntingwarrior. I am not sure which impressed me most  - this ferocious man or theunintentional helicopter acrobatics over White Island's yawning maw.Michael Woods was a guest of the New Zealand Tourism Board, from whichfurther information can be obtained: New Zealand House, Haymarket, LondonSW1Y 4TQ, tel: 071-973-0360. The attractions he visited in and aroundRotorua included White Island, with Tarawera Helicopters, based at the Maoriarts and crafts institute, tel: Rotorua (07) 348-1223; the summit of MountTarawera, with Mount Tarawera 4WD Tours, PO Box 5157, Rotorua, tel:07-357-4026; Waimangu volcanic valley, tel: 07-366-6137; the Bath House artand history museum, tel: 07-348-4197; and the buried village of Te Wairoa,tel: 07-362-8287. Brad Scott's tel: 07-374-8211.

*
17 Sep 1993
Commodities and Agriculture: Volcano pushes Patagonian sheep over the brink - After years of struggle the eruption was the last straw for many.
By JOHN BARHAM
      
THE SHEEP farms of Patagonia are gradually disappearing. Sheep farming, theonly agricultural activity the barren, windswept steppes can support, hasbecome a ruinously loss-making business. Farmers burdened by rising debtsand falling incomes are abandoning their properties in increasing numbers.Patagonia's sheep sector began declining in the 1960s, but the downturnaccelerated dramatically two years ago. The collapse in the internationalwool market - a glut has driven prices to the lowest point in living memory -coincided lethally with spreading desertification, a radical shift ingovernment economic policy and natural disaster.On August 13, 1992, Mount Hudson, a volcano high in the Chilean Andeserupted, spewing vast quantities of ash over the southern half of Patagonia.The ash ruined the sheep's wool, making it worthless, and transformed areasof the province of Santa Cruz into wasteland. Sheep could not graze on theash-covered land and slowly died.Mr Jimmy Patterson, a wool trader and descendant of the Scottish farmers whofirst introduced sheep to Patagonia from the nearby Falkland Islands in1885, says the ash made his parents close their 30,000-hectare family farmon the east coast of Santa Cruz. Last year, 452 farms covering 8m hectaresin Santa Cruz went the same way. For most of them, the eruption was the coupde grace that followed years of mounting losses.Closures are common elsewhere in Patagonia and Mr Juan Ventura, who ownsthree farms, says they will become more frequent. 'You don't see the effectsimmediately. What is happening is that farmers are consuming their capital.They're not spending on maintenance. Eventually they go bankrupt.'Many farmers are trying to hang on. Mr Raul Assef, who owns a 1,500-hectarefarm on the western edge of Patagonia, says 'both my wife and I work in townand use our wages to cover the loss of running the farm. You never know whatmight happen in this country and the market might even recover one day'.Patagonia's isolated farms cover huge areas but can only support smallflocks, making them expensive to run. In arid central Patagonia a sheepneeds 5 ha to graze on and farms of 2,500 ha are common.Few farmers can afford the investments needed to improve efficiency or switch over to more profitable cattle farming. Those who can are expanding their cattle herds, now that Patagonia has been declared free offoot-and-mouth disease.Beef 'imports' from the infected north are banned, allowing local producersto charge premium prices.Others are branching into flower or fruit production. In the watered,protected mountain valleys to the west, strawberries, boysenberries andraspberries grow well. The government is negotiating a joint World Bank andInter-American Development Bank loan for an irrigation project in the eastof the province.Even if wool prices do recover, Patagonia's farmers will not be able toraise output much. A century of over-grazing has devastated the centralplateau, which covers about one third of Argentina's territory.Desertification is a serious problem.The arid plains are framed by distant low-lying hills and dotted withoccasional termite hills The stony soil is covered with khaki-colouredshrubs and tufts of tough grass. Occasionally, small groups of sheep can beseen searching for foliage.Mr Guillermo Defosse, economic development under-secretary in the provinceof Chubut, says that although the region's wool is considered to among 'thefinest in the world, little consideration was given to the vegetation andthe soil which supported that production'.Production this year is forecast at 90,000 tonnes, 13 per cent less thanlast year. In Chubut, wool production has fallen to 18,000 tonnes in 1992from 26,833 tonnes a decade earlier.Argentina's adoption four years ago of free market policies compounded thesesetbacks. The government abolished its hated agricultural export taxes andreduced other taxes. But its anti-inflation policies led to a strongrevaluation of the currency, reducing export revenues and increasing costs.These policies hit farmers throughout Argentina, but few are suffering asmuch as those in Patagonia. Federal and local governments are helping withcheap loans, subsidies, grants and tax breaks worth over USDollars 75m areavailable to support or convert farms to other activities.Policy is confused, however. A Chubut official said 'one department wantssmall farms to merge to reduce stocking levels and another encourages themto survive by sharing equipment or through credit unions'. He also recognises that the government has done little to introduce modern farmingand water-management methods that are less harmful to the land.Although the disappearance of Patagonia's sheep farms is leading to thedepopulation of a vast area of the country and creating serious socialproblems, it could at least have the long-term benefit of relieving pressureon the land and slow the advance of desertification.

*
3 Feb 1993, page 5 / Volcano deaths
By REUTER
LEGAZPI, PHILIPPINES

At least nineteen people were killed and around 20 farmers were listed as missing after the dormant Philippines Mayon volcano, world-famed for its beautiful cone, erupted yesterday reports Reuter from Legazpi, Philippines.

*
16 Jan 1993, page 1
World News In Brief: Briton feared dead in volcano eruption
A British scientist was thought to be among at least nine people killed in a volcanic eruption in southern Colombia. Geoff Brown, 47, was attending a vulcanologists' conference.
    
*
15 Jan 1993, page 1 
World News in Brief: Eruption kills volcano experts
Four scientists were killed and eight injured in southern Colombia when a volcano erupted as they worked near its crater. Ten more people are missing.
They were attending a vulcanology conference at a nearby town.

<#NS>
*
vol 127 issue 1726 - 21 July 90 
Volcano damages.
HAROUN Tazieff, the French vulcanologist and former government minister, has been fined 10 000 francs (about Pounds sterling 1000) for libelling the geologist Claude Allegre, a high-ranking education ministry adviser. Tazieff had called him a forger, 'Claude the Fraud', a 'charlatan' who 'descended from Stalin's favourite geneticist, Lysenko'. 
The remarks, in an interview in Penthouse magazine, reflect Tazieff's fury dating back 14 years to a quarrel over the chances of a volcano erupting in Guadeloupe. Tazieff, sure there was no danger, left the French island; Allegre then arrived, had the local population evacuated and, although there was no eruption, sacked Tazieff from his post at the Global Physics Institute for having left the island prematurely. 
The judges followed the scientific argument closely, turning down Allegre's claim for damages of 10 000 francs because Tazieff 'had the right to denounce mistakes and even incompetence' in the affair. 
But they fined the vulcanologist the same amount and made him pay one franc in symbolic damages to Allegre because his accusation of political manoeuvring was unproven and his animosity 'went beyond purely scientific polemic'

*
vol 154 issue 2077 - 12 April 97, page 13
Volcano in Oz.
ONLY the second active volcano ever to be discovered on Australian territory has been found on McDonald Island? tiny speck of land some 4500 kilometres southwest of Perth.
Clouds of steam were seen rising from the island when scientists sailed by last month on the research vessel Aurora Australis. The only other volcanic site on Australian territory is Big Ben, a mountain on Heard Island about 30 kilometres from McDonald Island.

*
vol 122 issue 1669 - 17 June 89,
Small volcano in Chile.
SATELLITE images which suggested that a volcano in northern Chile might become active have been proved correct. Lascar, a volcano in the central Andes which appeared unusually hot on images taken between 1984 and 1987, has begun to erupt lava in the past few months. The geologists' findings are reported in a letter to Nature (8 June, p 434) by David Rothery of the Open University in Milton Keynes. 
British and American scientists using infrared images from the Landsat Thematic Mapper spotted Lascar as an unusually hot volcano some time ago (This Week, 15 April). They suggested that the heat meant that Lascar was active. The observations of lava show that they were right.

*
Feb 2, 2002 v173 i2328 p3(1). 

Title: Caught out again: The Goma volcano gave us a warning but no one was listening. 

VOLCANOES drop heavy hints before they erupt. For one thing they rumble and start to bulge as molten rock rises up from below. You'd think then, with all our seismographs and Earth-observing satellites, that pinpointing the time of an eruption would be a cinch? "Not necessarily" is the resounding answer. The eruption in the Congo last month was a grave reminder that these angry giants can still surprise us. 

In theory, researchers know what pre-eruption signals to look for (see New Scientist, 12 January, p 28). The trouble is watching one volcano won't tell us how another will behave. Every volcano has its own personality. That means we don't just need the right instruments, we need them in the right places, clocking up data for a long enough time. 

Mount Nyiragongo gave volcanologists trouble on all these counts. It had only two seismographs and there was only one large eruption in 1977 to refer back to. With this limited information, weeks before the eruption local volcanologists could only tell Congolese officials that the volcano was restless. A false alarm back in 1994 didn't help. Instead of erupting, the lava kicked up a fuss but never left the crater. 

The value of predictions will always be limited until we can be sure exactly when a volcano is going to erupt, and preferably how much lava will spew out and in what direction. If scientists had been able to predict with confidence what they know with hindsight, officials might have taken more notice. If they had been told that this year's lava flood would be 10 times that of 1977, disgorging 200 million cubic metres of molten rock, and that it would probably devour a third of the nearby city of Goma, they could have organised shelters and clean water supplies. Property and lives could have been saved. 

True, gathering more data doesn't guarantee perfect predictions, but it will make them better. Mount Etna, which like Nyiragongo leaks lava rather than explosively ejecting it, is one of the most studied volcanoes in the world and, partly because of that, it's one of the most predictable. Last summer, scientists warned a day ahead of time that the volcano would blow at 1.30 pm in the afternoon, It was just three minutes late. 

Even with a vague warning and inadequate preparations, the loss of human life in Goma was thankfully small for such a huge natural disaster--about 100 deaths. And the future for monitoring Nyiragongo looks good. Volcanologists rushed to the Congo, and four new seismometers were on their way from donors in France and the US. But what of the other 600 active volcanoes in the world, only a dozen of which are constantly monitored? Many are near towns and cities. Should we wait for them to "do a Nyiragongo" before acting? It doesn't take vast amounts of money or effort to set up seismographs on a volcano. And while our forecasts will not improve immediately, it's ridiculous to wait till disaster strikes again before we make a start. 

*
Jan 12, 2002 v173 i2325 p29(4). 

Title: There she blows: When a volcano starts to rumble, how do you know if it's time to run? Tristan Marshall puts his ear to the ground. 
Author: Tristan Marshall 

ON 16 December 2000, Carlos Valdes issued an extraordinary warning. 
Popocatepetl volcano, he said, would explode in exactly two days' time. And he was right. On 18 December, Popocatepetl unleashed its largest eruption for a thousand years. 

Thanks to Valdes and his colleagues at CENAPRED, Mexico's National Centre for Prevention of Disasters, the army had evacuated thousands of local residents the day before. No one was hurt. But how did he manage to make such an accurate prediction? 

Volcano prediction has come a long way in the past 20 years. Unlike earthquakes, which remain erratic and unpredictable, volcanoes make distinctive creaks and groans in the run-up to an eruption. These allow researchers to pinpoint the timing of eruptions with extraordinary accuracy, giving people nearby time to escape before the volcano blows. 

But although researchers can now accurately predict when an eruption will occur, they still have no idea just how big it will be. Without that information, they can only guess how many people should be evacuated. The 2000Popocatepetl eruption may have been huge, but the dramatic fire fountains that rained on the volcano's upper slopes posed relatively little danger to villages far below. Preventing unnecessary evacuations is crucial, because local people quickly lose faith in scientists who cry wolf. What's really needed is a way to work out whether a volcano is just clearing its throat, gearing up for a cataclysmic explosion or--like Popocatepetl--something in between. 

The answer may be hidden in the same volcanic rumblings that reveal the eruption's timing. In the past few years, volcanologists have managed to use records of these growls to explain the size of eruptions after the event, Now they reckon they can us them to predict the size of eruptions in advance. All they need is a restless volcano. 

Modern skills in predicting eruptions go back to the aftermath of the cataclysmic eruption of Mount St Helens in Washington state in 1980. The following year, seismologist Bernard Chouet from the US Geological Survey in Menlo Park travelled to the volcano with a colleague, Mike Fehler. Mount St Helens was still very active and he scientists wanted to listen to the vibrations it was producing in the hope of understanding what was going on inside. "Volcanoes are talking to you all the time," says Chouet. "They give beautiful signals." 

There was one kind of signal at Mount St Helens that Chouet was particularly interested in. It was a vibration that built up over several seconds, dominated by a sin le low-frequency wave that could last for a minute or more. Chouet called it a "long-period" event. Looking at the shape of the wave, he realised what had caused it: resonance. 

The phenomenon is familiar enough. Most musical instruments exploit resonance to produce notes of a particular pitch. Air pumped into one end of an organ pipe, for example, triggers standing waves in he column of air trapped inside. Their wavelength--and hence pitch of the sound they emit--depends on the size and shape of the pipe. Chouet wondered if the same process happens in a volcano. Each long-period event, he reasoned, could be the sound of some fluid--molten magma or gas--resonating in a crack inside the volcano after a sudden change in pressure, perhaps caused by fresh magma entering the crack. 

At Mount St Helens, Chouet noticed clusters of long-period signals that all had the same frequency and lasted for the same length of time. He figured that these must have come from the same crack in the volcano, and that counting these long-period events would be a way to monitor how fast the pressure was increasing. The more events from a single crack, the closer you should be to an explosion. 

Chouet looked at research done on other volcanoes around the world and found that many produced similar long-period events before eruptions. But were these signals reliable enough for him to use to predict eruptions in advance? He was about to find out. 

In late December 1989, seismometers on Mount Redoubt in Alaska began to register a series of long-period events. The rate of events increased rapidly and within a few days merged into a continuous tremor as a sticky lava dome oozed out at the summit of the volcano. Chouet, working with researchers at the Alaska Volcano Observatory in Anchorage, began counting the rumbles. On 1 January 1990, the researchers forecast that an eruption would occur within 24 hours, and an oil terminal at the foot of the mountain was hastily evacuated, The next evening the dome exploded, sending a vast muddy river of melted snow and ice mixed with ash cascading down the mountain. Chouet was elated. "It was a wonderful feeling," he recalls. "The people at the oil terminal thought we could walk on water." 

But Chouet was not content to stop there. He wanted to use long-period events to predict the size of an eruption too. Since he knew that each signal contained a set of resonant frequencies, he reasoned that the characteristic frequencies of a volcanic crack would depend on its size--just like the pitch of an organ pipe. Similarly, he realised that the amplitude and duration of the long-period event would depend on the pressure in the crack. If he could use long-period events to work out the size of the crack and the pressure it was under, he would be well on the way to predicting the size of the eruption that could follow. 

Using these ideas Chouet developed what amounts to a virtual volcano--a mathematical model of how a resonating volcanic crack generates long-period signals. The model uses factors like the size of a crack and the pressure it is under to predict the seismic signal that it should produce. Although Chouet developed the theory during the 1980s, he had to wait until the mid-1990s before computers were powerful enough to do the number-crunching. 

His first subject was Mount Redoubt. Using his model, Chouet tried various combinations of crack sizes and pressures. Eventually he created synthetic long-period events that bore a striking resemblance to the signals he had observed on Redoubt. What's more, Chouet's crack sizes and pressures would produce the same size of eruption that had occurred on Redoubt. "It's a defining moment because suddenly you realise the volcano is speaking to you and you understand the language," he says. 

But guessing all the different possible combinations of crack size and pressure was infuriatingly laborious. Chouet needed to get the computer to do the donkey work. His idea was to take the data on long-period events from real volcanoes and run it backwards through the model. That way, the computer would work out the size of the crack that generated those events and how much pressure it was under. 

It took a further advance in computing power before Chouet could turn his idea into reality. Now he has managed to use his automated virtual volcano to work out crack sizes and pressures for a few minor explosions that took place at Stromboli in Italy. And he believes his volcano model is now ready to be used to forecast the size of eruptions in advance. "We're one step away from the big answer," he says. 

But things may not be that simple. Jurgen Neuberg of the University of Leeds agrees with Chouet that long-period events are the key to predicting the timing of eruptions--but predicting their size is a different story. Neuberg has carried out a detailed study of the rumblings from the Soufriere Hills volcano on the Caribbean island of Montserrat. Just as at Redoubt, long-period events at the Soufriere Hills are a sign that pressure is building up in the lava dome. For Neuberg, this pattern sounds the alarm that the dome is about to blow--as happened in July 2001, showering the nearby village of Salem with cherry-sized pumice stones. 

According to Neuberg, Chouet's model of long-period events omits an important characteristic of magma inside volcanoes. Deep down, the magma is just thick and gloopy. But as the molten rock rises, the pressure exerted by the weight of the rock above decreases, and gases dissolved in the magma begin to bubble out of solution. The magma becomes bubbly, and then higher still the gas overwhelms the magma, until sticky droplets of liquid magma become suspended in a matrix of gas. Finally the droplets of magma may shatter into pieces of ash. So the way magma behaves depends critically on how deep it is in the volcano (New Scientist, 26 October 1996, p 28). And Neuberg points out that the nature of the fluid in the crack could have a significant effect on the rumbles that fluid produces. 

Using his observations at Montserrat, Neuberg has constructed his own virtual volcano based on the same principles as Chouet's, but incorporating the idea that the "bubbliness" of the magma varies with depth (Journal of Volcanology and Geothermal Research, vol 101, p 83). Neuberg found that lots of different combinations of fluid type, crack length and pressure could generate similar long-period events. That makes it impossible to run the model backwards and use the long-period events to calculate the size of the crack and the pressure it is under. 

Chouet agrees that depth is important but believes it is not as big a problem as Neuberg suggests. Chouet points to a physical model of a volcano developed by Steve Lane at the University of Lancaster. Lane uses pine sap together with acetone or ether to represent magma and the gas dissolved in it. To simulate a magma chamber with a crack above it, he puts this mixture in a sealed chamber below a glass tube. When the seal is broken, the mixture explodes into a foam that races up the tube, becoming increasingly bubbly the higher it goes--just like real magma. 

Lane found that the foam produced resonating signals similar to the long-period events detected from within volcanoes. But when he pinpointed where the resonance was coming from, he realised that it only occurred where the bubbliness was at a roughly constant level--not throughout the flow (Journal of Geophysical Research, vol 106, p 6461). Chouet reckons that if magma resonance works in the same way, his virtual volcano still provides an accurate model of what happens in real volcanic cracks. 

For the moment this dispute will be difficult to resolve because researchers don't understand exactly what the fluid that resonates in volcanoes is, or why it starts resonating in the first place. Neuberg hopes that some answers will come from a joint European-American project he has helped set up on Montserrat. Next month, he and his colleagues will install a full array of monitoring equipment on the Soufriere Hills volcano, all collecting data in real time. Later in the year, they plan to drill four boreholes into the heart of the volcano to collect information down where the action is happening. The enormous range of data Neuberg and colleagues will gather should give them an unparalleled view of what magma and gases are doing inside the mountain. 

Meanwhile, Chouet is confident about his model. He believes that we now know enough about volcanoes to be able to "peel back" the surface of an active volcano and peer inside. In 10 years' time, he hopes that tourist visitors to Kilauea volcano in Hawaii will be greeted by a giant TV screen. There they will have a virtual view right inside Kilauea's caldera and be able to see in real time what is happening under their feet. "We will remove the mountain and look directly at the fluid," says Chouet. 

But the big test will be when Montserrat or another well-monitored volcano next erupts. Will Chouet, Neuberg or anyone else be prepared to stick their neck out and publicly predict in advance how big the eruption will be? It's a tough call, especially when thousands of lives may depend on the answer. But given that volcanoes killed a hundred thousand people in the past century, there's a strong incentive to try. 

Tristan Marshall is a London-based researcher with BBC Television's Horizon series. Volcano Hell will be broadcast in Britain on 17 January at 9 pm on BBC2 

"Long-period seismicity: its source and use in eruption forecasting" by Bernard Chouet, Nature, vol 380, p 309 (1996). For more information, try the US Geological Survey Volcano Hazards Program at http://volcanoes.usgs.gov 

*
May 19, 2001 v170 i2291 p50. 

Title: Stan and the volcano.(Review)_(book review) 
Author: Steven Sparks 

Taking risks is part of a volcanologist's life, but are there dangers that can and should be avoided 

Surviving Galeras by Stan Williams and Fen Montaigne, Little, Brown, [pound]16.99, ISBN 0316855707 

ON 14 January 1993, a party of volcanologists and local people left a conference in Pasto, Colombia, to climb to the crater of the nearby Galeras volcano. At about 1.40 pm, the volcano exploded. Nine people were killed, and of those who survived many were badly injured. One of these was Stan Williams, a professor of geology from Arizona State University in Phoenix. 
Surviving Galeras is his account of the tragedy, written with journalist Fen Montaigne. 

Williams suffered horrific injuries: a fractured skull, an almost completely severed leg and multiple burns. He endured 14 operations and was left with no hearing in his left ear. Perhaps more profound are the psychological impacts of being a survivor, the loss of close colleagues, and the controversy stirred up by the Galeras deaths. 

Surviving Galeras makes compelling reading, as it builds up to the terrible moments in the crater. Parts of it are painful to read, especially Williams's account of talking to bereaved relatives. The book is bound to stir up controversy, debate and possibly anger among volcanologists. In the past two decades, 23 of them have died in volcanic eruptions, a considerable death toll given that the entire international community numbers only a few hundred. 

Williams seems to assert that the only true volcanologists are those who take risks on active volcanoes and make observations in dangerous places, defying death for the sake of humanity and science. This stereotypical image is one loved by the media, and Williams isn't shy about appearing in interviews and TV documentaries. This has not endeared him to many colleagues who regard the promotion of the hero-volcanologist image as irresponsible. 

I ended up feeling sympathy for Williams as the victim of a terrible trauma. But I find his views on the science and the way science should be done dangerous and specious. The lessons of Galeras should point in quite the opposite direction to his romantic vision. 

The excellence of science has little to do with the amount of risk taken or the scientist's charisma. This is not to say that there are no risks in volcanology. Most volcanologists share Williams's excitement and wonder at one of the greatest spectacles of nature. But there has been a sea change in attitude. Volcanology is advancing at an unprecedented rate thanks to remote observations from satellites and borehole instruments, computer modelling, and measurements on sophisticated mass spectrometers. 

Those who have to venture onto the flanks of an active volcano are increasingly aware of the hazards. Responsible leaders of scientific teams minimise exposure time. 

Another book on Galeras by investigative journalist Victoria Bruce (No Apparent Danger, HarperCollins, 2001) reaches a different conclusion, suggesting that Williams must shoulder some blame for the tragedy. This conclusion is unfair. While I fundamentally disagree with Williams's approach to volcanology as a whole, there is no compelling evidence to link his idiosyncratic views with the tragedy. Our understanding of volcanoes like Galeras and their sudden explosive activity was rudimentary in 1993. Major advances made since then have come from studies of Galeras, Unzen in Japan and Montserrat in the Caribbean. Breakthrough papers have appeared, including a pivotal paper by Bernard Chouet in Nature in 1996. Chouet appears to be one of  Williams's greatest critics, but this seems rather harsh given the state of knowledge in 1993. 

On balance, Williams's tale is a valuable contribution to volcanology. I hope that many will read the book and reflect on its implications. But I also hope that they reject his concept of the hero-volcanologist. 

Volcanologist Steven Sparks is a professor of earth sciences at the University of Bristol

*

Oct 16, 1993 v140 n1895 p20(1). 

Title: Volcano watchers draft in radar. 
Author: Daniel Pendick 

Abstract: The Volcano Crisis Assistance Team of the US Geological Survey is using Doppler radar systems to help visualize the dynamics of volcano eruptions. Used typically to track rainstorms or military aircraft, the radar system first found practical applications in volcano monitoring during the eruption of Mount Pinatubo in the Philippines in Jun 1991. Similar technology is now being used to monitor the eruption of Mount Unzen, Japan. In addition to providing information on debris velocities, Doppler radar is also useful in tracking volcanic ash clouds, which pose as a hazard to jet aircraft. 

RADAR systems usually used to track rainstorms or military aircraft are being used to study erupting volcanoes, providing potentially life-saving data. 

"The single most important piece of information you can have is whether an explosive eruption is in progress," explains Rick Hoblitt, a volcanologist at the Cascades Volcano Observatory in Vancouver, Washington. "You might think it would be no problem telling if a volcano is erupting or not, but believe me, it is." Hoblitt is heading the US Geological Survey's effort to equip its Volcano Crisis Assistance Team (VCAT) with a portable Doppler radar system. "The purpose of the radar is to give you eyes that will see through obscuring weather, ash clouds or darkness," he says. 

Established in 1986, the VCAT team responds on short notice to awakening volcanoes worldwide, providing scientific help and collecting information. Members of the team realised how valuable Doppler radar would be in June 1991 when they were in the Philippines studying the eruption of Mount Pinatubo. A series of eruptions preceding Pinatubo's climactic outburst sent up lingering clouds of fine ash which obscured the scientists' view of the volcano from Clark Air Force Base, 20 kilometers away. When volcanologists cannot make direct observations of a volcano, they usually turn to seismic information to tell them what is happening. But Hoblitt recalls: "At that point our seismographs were saturated, and it was very difficult to interpret the signals that were coming from the volcano." Seismographs alone cannot determine if a volcano is erupting. 

Like ordinary radar, Doppler systems probe their surroundings with radio-frequency pulses to fix the range and direction of distant objects. But Doppler radar can also measure how much the frequency of the returning pulse has been shifted in its encounter with a moving object. This Doppler shift--the same effect that raises and then lowers the apparent pitch of an ambulance's siren as it approaches and then recedes--can be used to measure the velocity of a moving target. 

The VCAT team believe that its Doppler radar, which it expects to be delivered in six months' time, will be the first to be bought specifically for monitoring volcanoes. Japanese volcanologists have been using a portable Doppler radar loaned by the Japanese military since May 1991 to monitor the eruption of Mount Unzen on the island of Kyushu. 

According to Setsuya Nakada, a volcanologist at Kyushu University, scientists have set up the radar about seven kilometres from the volcano vent and used them to measure how far flows of ash and debris travel down the volcano's slope. This is part of an intense effort being mounted at Unzen to understand the motion and warning signs of such "pyroclastic flows", one of the most destructive of all volcanic hazards. An unexpectedly large flow on Unzen's eastern slope in June 1991 killed 43 people--including three volcanologists. 

The VCAT's $150 000 portable radar system will weigh 500 kilograms and will pack into six cases for transport, the largest of the cases being about the size of a large domestic refrigerator. The receiving and transmitting antenna is just 75 centimetres across, giving the radar a useful range of about 50 kilometres. The system can be transported in light vehicles to an observing site, where it can be set up in a couple of days. It should be able to detect ash and debris particles as small as sand grains. 

Because the Doppler radar can measure velocities, it could warn when debris hurled high into the atmosphere in a volcanic plume begins to fall back towards its source. This phenomenon, called "column collapse", can lead to pyroclastic flows. 

Doppler radar could also be used for tracking volcanic ash clouds, which pose a danger to jet aircraft. Ash sucked into engine intakes of an aircraft flying through such a cloud can stall the engines or damage them permanently. 
In the past 12 years more than 60 commercial jets have suffered engine damage or loss of power as a result of flying through drifting ash clouds. 
*
Sept 11, 1993 v139 n1890 p30(5). 

Title: Danger! Scientists at work. (scientists doing research under dangerous conditions) 
Author: Scott Veggeberg 

Abstract: Scientists and researchers continue to work despite the dangers involved in their work. Stanley Williams, a volcanologist who survived the eruption of the Galeras volcano in Columbia, plans to continue his research despite the death of six of his colleagues and the seriousness of his injuries. The researchers do not have suicidal tendencies, and it is the sheer thrill and fascination for their work which prompts them to forget the danger. 

WHEN volcanologists converged on the bustling town of Pasto, Colombia, for a workshop on reducing death in natural disasters, confronting their own morality was probably the last thing on their minds. But in January the Galeras volcano, a mere five miles from downtown Pasto, erupted, spewing boulders the size of television sets. It was not a major eruption, but eight scientists attending the workshop were near or inside the volcano's crater. Only two survived. 

The tragedy at Galeras is only one example of the way some researchers risk their lives in the pursuit of science. This year alone, eight researchers have lost their lives in two separate incidents in South America as they looked for clues on how to predict volcanic eruptions in the hope of saving lives. 
Similar sombre tales abound in other areas of research, from the polar ice caps to Africa's jungles to the earth's orbit. 

But why do these scientists put themselves at risk? What draws them to the volcano or to shark-infested waters? There is adventure and excitement, many of them say, but many also view the dangerous situations they encounter as no more hazardous than more mundane activities, such as crossing the road or driving a car. 

Stanley Williams, a volcanologist from Arizona State University in Tempe and one of the survivors of Galeras, says: "Going to volcanoes is not as dangerous as driving [a car] in developing countries." In this context, the Galeras incident was one tremendous car crash for volcanology, which has less than 100practitioners worldwide. 

On 14 January about a dozen scientists were milling around the Galeras crater making measurements of gases emerging from the volcano and of the changes in local gravitational pull that indicate magma working its way up to the surface. By midday about half of the group had begun their descent, while Williams, as leader of the field trip to the crater, remained at the rim to guide the remaining researchers down. He recalls having a chat about how well the work was going with Russian volcanologist Igor Menyailov, who was just a few metres below him smoking a cigare. That's when the blast occurred, disgorging a hail of hot rocks, gases and lava that killed Menyailov and five others. 

The curious thing about the incident at Galeras was that this was not a "red hot, ready-to-blow volcano", says Barry Voight, a volcanologist at Pennsylvania State University. However, he adds that the Galeras eruption could have been predicted through the proper interpretation of seismic data from a series of small precursor events, but there are only about half a dozen people in the world who might have been able to anticipate the eruption. 
For Williams, who specialises in gas and water flow as eruption predictors, and for others, it wouldn't have been possible. "It's not like the symptoms were so obvious that a general practitioner might have recognised it," says Voight. Williams says the eruption was unexpected.. On the previous occasion that the Galeras volcano erupted in July 1992 there was a week of noticeable seismic activity before the event. But the same sort of activity only occurred after this year's eruption. 

Today, Williams bears scars from serious burns and is still unable to walk without help, but he plans to return to study Galeras. He claims the risk to the town below is just too great to give up the work--though he also admits that returning to the volcano is not going to be easy. "It's going to be scary to go back to a crater the first time, but I'm sort of hooked ." 

Philip Kyle, a volcanologist at the New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology in Socorro, says he too is addicted to volcano study. "I think there's a thrill, there certainly is excitement, you do get your high, you do get your kicks from it. 

"In general, if you're a geologist, you look at all these cold, old volcanic rocks, and they're boring as shit. But when you actually go and see lava flows, it's very exciting. It brings everything alive," he says. 

Kyle, who has survived 21 seasons of studying Antarctica's Mount Erebus volcano-famous for an intriguing lake of magma deep inside its crater--says that he tries to temper his fascination with volcanoes with common sense. "I'm not masochistic in the sense of having any death wish. I'm not trying to get closer just to play chicken with nature." 

However, he doesn't accept that the seismic indications were as subtle as Voight contends. They should have been sufficient to warn the volcanologists that all was not well on the mountain. Yet they went ahead regardless. 

"But you're inclined to do that," says Kyle. "You're hotheaded. Here's this volcano waiting to be worked on. So you don't look at the seismic records as well as you should." Kyle says that if he had been at the Colombian workshop, he wouldn't be alive today. "I think if I'd have been there, almost certainly I would have been with the [Galeras] group. I would have been with Igor [Menyailov], who was a good friend of mine," he says. 

Kyle says there is something that happens when volcanologists come together; a kind of herd mentality develops. He recalls an incident four years ago when he went to the rim of the Lonquimay volcano in Chile. This cauldron was spitting out the occasional boulder, and when one crashed to the ground just 100 metres from where he stood Kyle backed away. But he says he may have behaved differently if other volcanologists had been there. "Sometimes you egg each other on," says Kyle. 

Volcanologists believe that this "egging on" factor played an instrumental part in the death of Harry Glicken, who was killed on the Japanese volcano, Mount Unzen, in 1991. Colleagues believe that Glicken, who narrowly escaped death when Mount St Helens in Washington state in the US collapsed in 1980, probably would not have ventured up the volcano if left to his own devices. But at the time of the Mount Unzen eruption, he was acting as a guide for French volcanologists Maurice and Katia Krafft, who specialised in filming volcanic eruptions. 

The Kraffts were renowned for their spectacular footage of erupting volcanoes. In 1986, for instance, at the volcano on Augusy the Island in Alaska, they came within about 100 metres of an extremely dangerous pyroclastic flow--a 500 degrees C flash flood of ash-laden gas and boulders travelling at 100 miles per hour. The Kraffts were intent on getting the best footage possible since it had been a pyroclastic flow that had swept down from Mont Pelee in Martinique in 1902, killing 28 000 people. In fact, it was a videotape of volcanic hazards made by the Kraffts that helped convince authorities to evacuate the area around Mount Pinatubo in the Philippines. 

"They got great footage and they got it because sometimes they went into places that other volcanologists would be very uncomfortable about going into. They had a higher tolerance for risk than the average person," says Voight. 
But this attraction proved fatal when they got too close to Mount Unzen as it was erupting. And while they probably got the ultimate spectacular footage, none of it was ever recovered from the mountainside. The Kraffts died along with Glieken and 38 onlookers. 

But in spite of the hazards, there is good reason to persevere with volcano research, says Williams. By staying the course of volcano research, scientists can learn to predict disaster, and lives can be saved. Williams and postgraduate student Dina Lopez showed in Science, vol 260, page 1794 that the Nevado del Ruiz volcano in Colombia, which killed hundreds in mudslides following a 1985 eruption, could kill many more if the edifice collapses and results in a sideways explosion, as Mount St Helens did. 

Williams also points out that it is not always eruptions that pose a risk to volcanologist's lives. Many of the most interesting volcanoes are in the most politically volatile countries, he says. Williams can recall two instances when he was held at gunpoint: once by a soldier in Nicaragua and another time by the private guards of a wealthy Guatemalan landowner. 
*
March 6, 1993 v137 n1863 p19(1). 

Title: Pinatubo warms winters in the north. (eruption of Mt. Pinatubo, Philippines) 

Abstract: The eruption of Mt Pinatubo in the Philippines will bring about climactic changes around the world. The volcano spewed out huge amounts of sulphuric acid droplets into the stratosphere causing uneven warming patterns and changes in wind patterns. As a result, the Northern hemisphere will experience warmer winters due to the sulphuric acid heat barrier and strengthened zonal winds that bring warm air to the continents. 


LARGE volcanic eruptions have an overall cooling effect on the Earth, But in Eurasia and North America they make the winter after the eruption warmer, say researchers in the US. It does not matter in which hemisphere the eruption occurs. The effect was especially pronounced in the winter of 1991/92, after the eruption of Mount Pinatubo in the Philippines. 

Volcanoes cool the globe by injecting large quantities of material into the stratosphere, especially droplets of sulphuric acid. Once in the stratosphere, this material absorbs heat from the Sun, preventing it reaching the ground. 
This influence can last for several years. Already, the Pinatubo eruption has cooled the Earth's surface by an average of 0.5 (degrees)C. 

But as well as cooling the surface of the Earth, the absorption of solar energy. at high altitudes leads to a warming of the stratosphere. Both effects are weak at high latitudes in winter, when the Sun is low in the sky. 
This 
uneven pattern of warming in the stratosphere increases the contrast in temperature between high and low latitudes and changes the pattern of winds 
around the globe. 

Alan Robock and Jianping Mao of the University of Maryland have shown that the pattern of surface temperature changes in the months following 12 major eruptions, from Krakatoa in 1883 to Pinatubo in 1991, closely matches the pattern produced in a computer model subjected to this kind of regional warming of the stratosphere (Geophysical Research Letters, vol 12, p 2405). 
It explains why both Eurasia and North America experienced warm winter weather in 1991/92, while the Middle East was unusually cold. 

The key factor is a strengthening of zonal winds in high and mid-latitudes in winter, which brings warm maritime air over the continents. Because in winter the sea is generally warmer than nearby land (and colder, of course, in summer), this warms the land. The same effect does not occur in the southern hemisphere, because there are no cold mid-latitude continents there to be warmed by an influx of maritime air. 
*
Jan 2, 1993 v137 n1854 p14(1). 

Title: Hot dust threatens ozone above tropics. 
Author: John Gribbin 

Abstract: Research determined that the eruption of Mount Pinatubo damaged the ozone layer and reduced it by 30%. Aerosol particles ejected from the volcano increased the temperature of the lower stratosphere through the absorption of solar radiation and infrared rays reflected from the Earth's surface. Convection helps lift the warm air to the tropopause increasing its temperature by 1.5 degrees Celsius which primarily contributes to reduced ozone concentrations. Such conditions will persist in the future until such time when volcanic particles fall out of the stratosphere. 


AS researchers are coming to grips with the way volcanic eruptions help to destroy ozone over the poles, other studies are beginning to show how such eruptions damage the ozone layer above the tropics. 

American researchers have found that the tiny particles of debris ejected during an eruption warm the lower stratosphere both by intercepting infrared radiation reflected from the surface of the Earth and by absorbing incoming solar radiation. As a consequence, five months after the eruption of Mount Pinatubo in June 1991, the amount of ozone in the lower stratosphere over the tropics had been reduced by up to 30 per cent. Stewart Kinne and Brian Toon, of the NASA-Ames Research Center at Moffett Field in California, and Michael Prather, of the University of California, Irvine report these findings in Geophysical Research Letters (vol 19, p 1927). 

The process by which the aerosol particles destroy ozone in the tropics is quite different from the way they destroy ozone over the poles. At high latitudes, the aerosol particles are directly involved in chemical reactions that destroy ozone (New Scientist, Science, 28 November 1992). In the tropics, the warming caused by the aerosol changes the physical environment, and this tilts the balance of natural photochemical reactions against ozone. 

At low latitudes, ozone is constantly being created by some photochemical reactions, and destroyed in others. The concentration of ozone changes with the seasons and from day to night, but overall a rough dynamic balance is maintained. Much more ozone is produced in the tropics than is destroyed; the ozone spreads out to higher latitudes, where destruction dominates. 

When the lower stratosphere warms, convection lifts parcels of air from the region near the tropopause (the boundary between the troposphere and the stratosphere). Air in this part of the atmosphere normally rises about 17 metres a day. But the increase in temperature caused by the Pinatubo aerosol may have increased this to 40 metres a day. 

This changes the structure of the ozone layer, because the photochemical reactions which operate vary with altitude. Calculations carried out by the American team suggest that it took five months after the Pinatubo eruption for a new pattern to become established, with the ozone layer disturbed up to an altitude of 30 kilometres. A temperature increase of 1.5!degrees^C reduced 
ozone concentrations by between 10 and 30 per cent. 

The calculations apply only to the region within 15 degrees of latitude of the tropics, and the predicted ozone profiles match up well with observations made by instruments launched on balloons from Brazzaville in the Congo Republic (4!degrees^ South, 15!degrees^ East) between April and September last year. Things will gradually return to normal over a period of years--if there are no more large volcanic eruptions--as the volcanic aerosol disperses and falls out of the stratosphere. 

The discovery of this feedback between convection--and therefore the overall circulation of the atmosphere--and variations in ozone concentration has important implications. It may have implications for the way in which an enhanced greenhouse effect, which also stimulates convection, interacts with the ozone layer.
*
Dec 12, 1992 v136 n1851 p17(1). 

Title: Robot Dante's voyage to hell and back. (exploration of an active 
volcano in Antarctica) 
Author: Jonathan Beard 

Abstract: Mount Erebus, an active volcano in Antarctica, will be explored by Robot Dante in Dec 1992. Data and samples from within the volcano's crater will be gathered by the robot, which was developed by NASA and two US universities. Researchers are hoping that the experience to be gained from the exploration of the volcano will help them in their efforts to build robots to be used in the surface exploration of other planets. FOLLOWING in the fictional footsteps of the poet Dante, who descended into hell in his Divine Comedy, a robot also named Dante will later this month descend into the inferno of Mount Erebus, an active volcano in Antarctica. The eight-legged, spider-like robot, developed by two American universities and NASA, will gather data and samples from the hostile environment inside the volcano's crater. At the same time, robotics researchers hope to gain valuable experience about how to build robots to explore the surfaces of other planets. "The Erebus mission offers an opportunity to test technologies developed during more than seven years of research, in a very harsh environment," says William Whittaker from Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh, who led the design team that built the robot. "Both NASA and the National Science Foundation, which is also supporting this work, consider this Antarctic expedition to be a precursor to planetary exploration by robots, since it most closely approximates extraterrestrial environments." Dante arrives in Antarctica this week, and will then be transported to a base camp at the foot of the 3800-metre volcano. There it will be loaded onto a cart equipped with an electric winch and known as Geryon (after the creature that carried Dante and Virgil from one circle of hell down to the next in the Comedy). Geryon will haul itself and Dante up a cable that will be fixed up the side of the volcano, until it reaches the edge of the crater. On this part of its journey, Dante will be accompanied by Whittaker and Philip Kyle, a vulcanologist from New Mexico Tech in Socorro. The robot will then clamber down from Geryon, but the two will remain connected by a thin lifeline carrying power and communications links. As Geryon winches out the lifeline, Dante will slowly climb down the sheer walls of Erebus's crater towards the bubbling lava lake below. To guide it, Dante is equipped with a scanning laser rangefinder with a 360!degrees^ field of view, plus six video cameras whose outputs are combined to create three-dimensional images of the surrounding terrain. The images from the video cameras will be sent through the communications cable to researchers at the base camp, who will send back commands telling the robot where it should be going. Dante's on-board computers will then decide how it should move its legs to negotiate the terrain. The 260-metre descent to the crater floor is expected to take between 24 and 36 hours. To test whether a similar robot could be controlled on another planet from Earth, pictures from Dante's cameras will be sent via satellite to the Goddard Space Flight Centre in Maryland. Researchers in the US will not be able to command Dante's movements, but they will control some of its scientific instruments. It will take two seconds for a command to travel from the US to the interior of the crater; it would take tens of minutes to send signals to nearby planets. No human researcher has ever ventured into the dangerous crater of Mount Erebus. "I have worked in Antarctica for 20 years, and been involved in several unsuccessful attempts to climb into the crater to collect volcanic gases," Kyle says. "All these attempts were stopped by the constant small eruptions from Erebus's lava lake." Dante will walk right up to vents around the lake, and take sample of the gases as they emerge from the molten lava. Its instruments will also test the composition of gases on the spot and measure the temperature of the lake. Kyle expects to find sulphur dioxide, hydrochloric and hydrofluoric acid, some of which may remain in the atmosphere long enough to contribute to the destruction of the ozone layer. When Dante has finished its work, it will climb out of the crater, supported by its lifeline. At the top, the scientific team will load the robot back onto Geryon for its journey back to the land of the living. 

*
July 11, 1992 v135 n1829 p34(4). 

Title: Under the volcano. (Novarupta in Alaska)(geologists want borehole in national park)(includes related article) 
Author: James Papike and John Eichelberger 

Beneath the mountains of Alaska, slowly cooling rocks lie at the heart of a volcano. To reveal their secrets, geologists want to drill a borehole in a pristine and beautiful national park EIGHTY years ago, 12 cubic metres of molten rock burst from the ground in the wilderness of southwest Alaska. The magma forced its way to the surface, erupting from a new volcanic vent, now called Novarupta, 10 kilometres from Mount Katmai. Gas that had been dissolved in the molten rock expanded and literally blew the volcano apart, filling the air with ash. After two-and-a-half days, when the eruption died down, a layer of ash 30 centimetres thick had fallen on the settlement of Kodiak, 170 kilometres downwind. But closer to the volcano, ash mixed with water and sediments flowed along the ground to form the strangest feature of this eruption--a valley that was, quite literally, steaming. The eruption had filled a broad glacial valley to a depth of 200 metres with hot ash, which covered the damp valley sediments; the moisture gave rise to innumerable smoking vents. There was almost no one in the Aleutian mountains to observe what is now known to be the biggest eruption of its type for nearly two thousand years. But when news of the event reached the outside world, geologists realised that it had been something out of the ordinary. In 1915, the American geologist Robert F. Griggs led a team of three into the Alaskan wilds to see what had happened. They found the strange new landscape of hot springs, smoking vents and ash everywhere--and gave the area a new name: the Valley of Ten Thousand Smokes. The Novarupta eruption was one of an important class of volcano--one involving magma with a high proportion of silica (silicon dioxide, [SiO.sup.2]). This type of molten rock is especially thick and sticky, and its intrusion into the upper layers of the Earth's crust leads to the most dangerous explosive eruptions. These volcanoes pose a significant threat to human life. They also bring benefits by setting up major systems of water circulation in the crust, transporting and concentrating valuable minerals and even helping to form the continental crust. The 1915 Griggs expedition and the larger teams he led in later years produced a unique archive of information about the aftermath of this massive eruption. Geologists now want to capitalise on this wealth of data--unavailable elsewhere in the world--by taking a closer look at the workings of the volcano. Expeditions have returned to Katmai National Park, to combine mapping with geophysical exploration. But to go further, they need to drill a borehole into the heart of the volcano, to reveal its foundations. Drilling can be a messy business, but the team of volcanologists backed by the US Geological Survey, the National Science Foundation and the US Department of Energy have already shown that they can work with minimum effect in this beautiful landscape. All they need now is the permission and money to go ahead; without it the lessons from this unique volcanological laboratory will go unlearnt. The early investigators believed that most of the magma that erupted came from a vent on Mount Katmai itself, but more recent studies show that virtually all of it came from Novarupta, a vent some ten kilometres away. Eyewitnesses reported that within hours of the onset of the eruption, two of three summits of Mount Katmai began to collapse. This important observation established the link between the two volcanic centres. The mountain collapsed to form a large, basin-shaped crater, or caldera, 1 kilometre deep and 3 kilometres across. It is now ringed by fractures and appears to bulge in the centre. The vent at Novarupta is probably a funnel-shaped structure that grew widest at the surface by a combination of attrition during eruptions and slumping afterwards. Most of this funnel was filled by rubble, called tephra, and ash as each stage of the eruption died back. The vent 2 kilometres wide that supplied the ash for the first day's eruption, then filled with volcanic debris and ash, contains the vents of the later stages of the eruption. The first phase of the eruption produced ash especially rich in silica, known as rhyolite. On the second and third days, ash with a distinctly lower proportion of silica emerged through a 500-metre wide vent within the rubble of the first eruption, and within that vent is the400-metre diameter vent that produced the last phase of the eruption. Lava solidified in the vent in the final burst of eruption, leaving a plug of rock called the Novarupta Dome to mark the site. Griggs and his teams made valuable observations and measurements in the years after the eruption, particularly on transient phenomena, such as the fumaroles. Six years after the eruption they found that some of them were still as hot as 654[degrees]C. The heat needed to generate and sustain the fumaroles came from the sheets of ash that had flowed across the valley. The water came from the plentiful rain and shallow ground water flowing into and over the ash layer. The resulting steam also hastens the cooling of the ash. Griggs and his team found that the fumaroles were also emitting gases that had been dissolved in the molten rock before it erupted. Most of the fumaroles had cooled and died out by the mid-1930s except around the Novarupta vent. The few that remain today, with temperatures as high as 90[degrees]C, are still an attraction for weary hikers. As geologists accumulated evidence pointing to Novarupta, not Mount Katmai as the focus of the eruption, they needed wider-ranging investigations. If there is a large hole filled with tephra or hot igneous rocks in the sedimentary basement of the Valley of Ten Thousand Smokes, researchers reasoned that geophysical methods should reveal it. Expeditions returned to Katmai in 1989 and 1990 to investigate the physics of the region where the vent is thought to lie on the basis of geology. The team set up a grid of 150 reference points over six square kilometres spanning the position of the vent inferred from topography and patterns of fractures. They measured gravity and magnetic characteristics at each point in the grid, and left 17 sites marked so that they can return to them in the future. The team also used the grid as a reference for surveys of heat flow, resistivity, and seismic properties. In addition, the team made a low-altitude aeromagnetic survey and continued geological and geochemical investigations. 

Environmental care.

Any researchers working in the wilderness of Katmai must take more than usual care to minimise their impact on the environment. The 1989 expedition established a camp on the east edge of the vent, in a narrow barren valley. Helicopter use was kept to a minimum and most of the power for the equipment came from solar cells supplemented occasionally by a sound-insulated generator. Meticulous fuel management cut down on exhaust gases and food and waste were sealed in bear-proof containers. Research procedures were carefully thought out to use as few flags and surface markers as possible. Afterwards, the markers were removed, footprints raked away, and everything, including human waste, was flown out. Park wardens conducted frequent inspections to make sure that the team was complying with environmental laws and the conditions of the permit for the research. In 1990, the team made the most of having people and helicopter support by renovating and tidying the dilapidated shelter on Baked Mountain that they used as a base. Volcanologists understand a lot about how volcanoes work: models for intrusion, eruption, cooling and alteration are well developed and widely accepted. But hardly any of them have been tested. The best way to do so would be to drill into a volcano that has erupted recently enough to be still cooling and changing chemically. The Katmai volcanic system, with its sequence of scientific observations dating back to the time of the eruption, provides a unique opportunity to do this. Novarupta is an ideal volcano for such a drilling project. First, it is the right size--probably the only eruption in historic times to produce a sheet of ash large enough and hot enough to weld together, and the only historic rhyolite eruption in the United States. Although eruptions between 10 and 100times as large are know to have happened, it falls into the class of eruptions both large enough to have serious consequences and frequent enough to represent a plausible threat. The age of the eruption is also a bonus. It is recent enough for there to have been eyewitness accounts and erosion and weathering of deposits of rubble and ash has been minimal. Most importantly from the point of view of drilling, high temperatures persist at reasonably accessible levels, perhaps within the first kilometre underground, but the surface has cooled enough not to be dangerous. The researchers hope that through drilling here they will be able to observe directly for the first time how igneous rocks cool underground. The relatively short time since the eruption also means that there will have been little weathering of the fragile minerals formed at high temperatures in the fumaroles, and relatively few volatile gases will have leaked away. This will help researchers to understand how the circulation of water and other vapours to the fumaroles carries other elements, such as the metals important for ores. 

Matching patterns 

The essential task in interpreting data from any borehole drilled through a volcano would be to assign the rocks and thermal and chemical gradients that the core intersects to an individual eruption. This would be a formidable problem in systems such as Mount Fuji in Japan, where small batches of magma of roughly the same composition repeatedly intrude the central conduit of the volcano. A borehole at Novarupta would be much easier to interpret. The Katmai eruption was a single burst of magma erupting through uniform sedimentary rocks at a site where there had been little previous volcanic activity, and none involving magma of the same composition. Thermal, chemical, lithological and structural observations at depth can all be related unambiguously to the 1912 event. The combined results of the geological and geophysical investigations at Katmai strengthen the case for drilling there. The geophysical surveys in particular support the hypothesis of a funnel-shaped vent below the Valley of Ten Thousand Smokes. The magnetic properties of the fractured region differ from its surroundings and, with the gravity data, suggest twin intrusions, one coinciding with the inner vent beneath Novarupta Dome and one concealed beneath a hill known as The Turtle. Both are within the outer vent funnel. Seismic data indicates that the ash-flow sheet is at most about 200 metres deep, quite thick enough to have stayed warm since 1912. Although most of the fumaroles that Griggs saw have vanished, patches of hot ground and weak steam vents persist today. Measurements of the heat flowing from the ground show that most of the shallow portion of the vent is cold. But there is evidence that, in places, the ash sheet retains some heat deep down. Warm ground water emerges from springs by the River Lethe in the upper part of its valley, suggesting that nearby ash is still warm. Geochemical investigations reinforce the researchers' models. Beforehand, the magma held a quantity of water equivalent to 4 per cent of its own weight. With this amount of water, the molten rock would have risen to within about 500 metres of the surface before the water boiled into steam, shattering the rock into the many tiny fragments that erupt as ash. This estimate is consistent with the surface signs that the vent lies within the upper kilometre of the ground surface--well within reach of a borehole. The magma contained other volatile elements before it erupted. Chlorine and fluorine were only partly lost in the eruption, so there must have been plenty of them in the ash sheet after the eruption. As vapour, chlorine and fluorine could have transported metals while the ash sheet was hot, and glass within ash fragments was crystallising. The fumaroles had a large role in chemical changes after the eruption. Analysis of the chemistry of fumaroles in the ash-flow sheet indicate that much of the movement happened very early in the evolution of these systems. A borehole penetrating the ash sheet would provide evidence for how this movement actually happened. A borehole could also help to determine how fast the Novarupta area has cooled so far, and how fast its cooling continues. Direct measurements in a borehole, combined with estimates from the groups of minerals formed at different stages in the evolution of the system will help the researchers to establish both the rates and mechanisms of cooling. The problem is simplified because the volcano itself is simple and its age is known precisely. The researchers plan to tackle these questions by drilling twice into the volcano. One hole will slant across the main vent and finish in the wall of the crater, a path that will enable researchers to measure how far and how fast the heat from the 1912 eruption has spread. A second hole will be vertical, and deep enough to penetrate the hot root of the volcano. In addition, there will be a third core into the ash-flow sheet. This will not be as deep as the other two, but it will reveal characteristics of the hidden interior of the ash. The drilling programme that researchers hope for should lead to a much better understanding of the eruptive dynamics of silicic volcanism and the transport of elements in vapour. Researchers need quantitative understanding of the processes in a young, simple system before we can hope to understand older or more complex volcanic events. The Valley of Ten Thousand Smokes is a unique geological laboratory that should not be allowed to go to waste. 
*
August 24, 1991 v131 n1783 p11(1). 

Title: Volcano clouds the picture on global warming. (Mount Pinatubo's 
eruption cooling the Earth's atmosphere while a new El Nino in the eastern Pacific is warming it) 
Author: Christopher Joyce 

CLOUDS of ash and gas spewing from Mount Pinatubo, the Philippine volcano, are cooling the Earth's athosphere -- while a new El Nino in the eastern Pacific is warming it. The result is confusion for those studying global warming. Since the explosion on 15 and 16 June, the eruption of Mount Pinatubo has become the largest of the century. For weeks ash and sulphur dioxide shot some 23 kilometres up into the stratosphere. Within 21 days of the first explosion, the Earth was girdled by a wide belt of sulphuric acid that now lies between 25 [degrees] North and 20 [degrees] South. The belt covers about40 per cent of the Earth's surface (see photograph). The cloud particles are especially good at reflecting radiation from the Sun in the visible range, 0.58 to 0.69 micrometres. The cloud's overall reflectivity, or aerosol optical thickness (AOT), now measures 0.2 over the tropics, and reaches 0.5 over places like the Sahara, which already generates dust in the atmosphere. The average AOT for the Earth is 0.1. At the same time, the cloud is inefficient at holding back reflected heat radiating up from the surface of the Earth. The net effect is cooling. According to mathematical models, the cloud will cool the Earth's surface by 2 [degrees] C in the tropics. As winter temperatures change the global movement of winds, tropical air will move toward the poles and spread the aerosol worldwide. Average global temperatures could drop 0.5 [degrees] C for between two and four years, say scientists at the US National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). However, a new El Nino weather pattern in the Pacific will help to warm the atmosphere. El Nino is an irregular warming of the ocean in the central and eastern Pacific which affects the weather differently in various parts of the world. It brings unusually heavy rain to South America while drying out India and the southern Pacific. NOAA's Climate Analysis Center in Maryland detected the signs of an El Nino last June, and some mathematical models also predict one. In terms of global warming, Pinatubo and El Nino work in opposition, says Vernon Kousky of NOAA. The El Nino could offset some of the cooling caused by the eruption of Pinatubo. "Pinatubo and El Nino are going to complicate the issues in greenhouse warming," says Kousky. Moreover, he says, some politicians will probably use any temporary cooling to argue that greenhouse warming is either not happening or that regular volcanic eruptions are an antidote. "I expect we'll soon be hearing from some saying, 'Let's light up a few volcanoes to stop global warming'." Meanwhile, the Pinatubo effect strengthens the hand of a small but vocal group of atmospheric scientists who claim that aerosols ejected from volcanoes at mid-latitudes cause El Ninos. Paul Handler, a physicist at the University of Illinois, says such aerosols modify the normal interaction of solar radiation and wind in the southern hemisphere to change the temperature of the sea surface. For more than a century, an El Nino has followed the eruption of a volcano, including El Chichon in Mexico in 1982 and 1983, and now Pinatubo. "The burden of proof is now to show that volcanoes don't cause El Ninos," says Handler. 

*
A state of emergency was announced across Santa Cruz in Argentina, after clouds of ash, dust and gas, spewing eastwards from Chile's Hudson volcano, covered the entire province. The clouds had also stretched more than 700 kilometres southwards, almost reaching the southern tip of the continent. The volcano, in the southern Andes, erupted twice last week after being dormant for two decades. Lava melted a huge mass of ice, causing avalanches and flooding. Some 3500 people live in the area worst affected by the eruption and hundreds have been evacuated. 

*
May 4, 1991 v130 n1767 p13(1). 

Title: Volcano prediction was bang on. (Colima volcano) 
Author: Christopher Joyce 

A VOLCANO in central Mexico exploded this month and propelled tongues of hot ash and gas down its slopes, just as an American geophysicist had predicted. Volcanologists who have recently descended the mountain believe the volcano may explode again at any time, perhaps catastrophically. The Colima volcano exploded on 16 April, say reports from Mexico. The eruption disgorged avalanches of dense, hot material. No casualties have been reported, although flows of ash and rubble at 600 [degrees] C set fire to vegetation, and one flow halted just two kilometres short of a village. The flows along the southwestern face of the mountain were predicted by a computer model devised by Michael Sheridan, chairman of geology at the University of Buffalo in New York. "This is the first time we've made a prediction" with a model, Sheridan said. The village that was nearly overrun had about a 60 per cent chance of being buried in an eruption, the model predicted. Sheridan visited Colima, some 160 kilometres, south of Guadalajara, on 27 March. The volcano had been spewing hot gasses ad lava since February and a dome, like a huge blishter, had grown to about 100 metres in diameter and 30 metres high. At the time Sheridan predicted that "if lava continues to come out of the top at the current rate . . . within two weeks, the top will become unstable, causing lava flows and avalanches". The two explosions on 16 April were the first major breaches of the dome. Sheridan said last week. He and other volcanologists suspect that the dome partially collapsed. They believe a big eruption could follow. Chuck Connor, a geophysicist at Florida International University in Miami, said: "It could be in a week, or it could go on like this for another year." Danger signs include swarms of small, local earthquakes. a swarm of several hundred a day occurred in February, followed by a lull. Then there was another swarm when the lava dome formed. After another lull, the volcano exploded this month. Such seismic lulls preceded the Mount St Helens eruption in Washington State in 1980. "In fact," said Connor, who returned to Colima this week, "it's a similar situation to Mount St Helens." Large fractures cut through both mountain tops before the eruptions occurred. A huge block of rock of about eight million cubic metres is balanced on the west side of Colima's summit. "The rock will deform and inflate if new magma goes into the upper cone, which is already weakened by the fracture," said Connor. The block might then slide off and plummet down the slope. Also, the chemistry of the magma oozing from the dome suggests that it holds a high proportion of water, a potentially explosive mix, said Connor. "The volcano is now at its most dangerous point," says Sheridan. The mountain stands 4000 metres high, with steep slopes and the unstable lava dome on top. Even small quakes could touch off avalanches or mud flows created by hot ash mixed with water. Sheridan's model considers the height of the summit and the steepness of the slopes in calculating the kinetic energy of avalanches. It also takes into account the viscosity of the volcano's output, the mass of air it must displace, and the friction created by the topography, as "retarding" forces. Geologists agree that several thousand people in villages on Colima's slopes are in danger. Mexican authorities have been alerted and given a "hazard map" that shows where flows will travel. The volcano has a history of active periods every 50 to 75 years; its last major eruption was in 1913, with minor eruptions in 1975 and 1982. Although geologists have a good idea of where avalanches and lava will travel, they cannot predict when or even whether Colima will erupt. Scientists at the University of Colima are monitoring its seismic behaviour. Buses were driven in this month ready for a quick evacuation. "But it's a tough job to keep people in a high state of activity for months," concedes Connor. 

*
Title: Return to Mount Etna: a volcano erupts, up close and very personal. (Sicily). He first saw Mount Etna at the age of 15, visiting with his parents from Eurasburg, Germany. "The desire was awakened in me," photographer Carsten Peter says. "As soon as I was able to travel on my own, 1 went to Mount Etna. It is my home volcano." But he had never seen the mountain erupt the way it did last summer, when he spent a week holed up in an abandoned observation station as the mountain exploded around him. "Most people are fascinated by films of volcanoes," says Carsten, who has also covered glaciers in Greenland, caves in Chile, and volcanoes in the South Pacific and Russia for NATIONAL GEOGRAPHIC. "For me, that's not enough. I have to see it in reality, eye to eye." 

*
vol 152 issue 2053 - 26 October 96, page 28
When volcanoes get violent - Some volcanoes explode dramatically while others are content merely to spew their lava down the hillside. Erik Stokstad visited the Greek island of Santorini to find out why
After several months of explosive eruptions, the Japanese volcano Mount Unzen seemed finally to have calmed down by May 1991. Though lava was still on the move, it stayed below the surface of the crater, sluggishly building up into a mound. The locals breathed a sigh of relief, convinced that the worst was over. They were wrong. On 3 June, the mound exploded. A searing hot avalanche of ash and lava rushed from the crater at several hundred kilometres per hour, destroying 180 houses and killing 43 people.
The fickleness of volcanoes can make them especially dangerous. Some gently ooze lava like squeezing toothpaste from a tube, while others suddenly explode with little or no warning. Often the same volcano can switch unexpectedly from "flow" to "blow" with catastrophic consequences for those living nearby. Despite volcanologists' diligent recording of earthquakes, ground deformation and gas emissions, at best they can only warn of an explosive eruption several hours to days in advance. They simply don't know enough about how volcanoes work.
So last month, 60 volcanologists and geologists met on the exploded volcano that is the Greek island of Santorini to compare notes and thrash out new ways to pin the problem down. Many were optimistic. If they succeed, it may even be possible one day to avert explosions, or to trigger them early, when everyone has been evacuated to a safe distance.
To understand explosive eruptions, geologists need to study the plumbing in the volcano's interior. Magma heads up to the surface from deep within the Earth. In many volcanoes it pauses in a reservoir called a magma chamber some 7 to 10 kilometres below the surface. From there magma travels to the surface along a central passageway through the volcano called the conduit, tens to hundreds of metres in diameter.
As it travels, geologists believe that the magma changes in fundamental ways, which ultimately determine whether it bursts violently out at the surface, or seeps gently down the mountainside. It all hinges on the large amounts of water vapour and other gases dissolved in the liquid magma. As the molten rock travels towards the surface, the pressure drops and the vapour forms bubbles. If the gas leaks out gradually, nothing remains to power the explosion and the lava simply flows. But if gas stays trapped in the magma until it reaches the surface, it is suddenly, dramatically released in an explosion. It's like a bottle of champagne-if the pressure inside is suddenly released, bubbles rapidly nucleate and expand, spraying out a foam. If the bottle is opened gradually, the suds just gently spill out.

This much has been understood for many years. But to work out the details, and so be able to predict or even avert disaster has proved extraordinarily difficult. After all, no one can slice open a volcano and track the gases in the moving magma. Instead, geologists have had to resort to more indirect approaches.
 One approach-using computers to model the processes leading to explosive eruptions-was developed in the late 1970s. But these early attempts were very crude and relied on many assumptions. Since then, more advanced models have been used to test ideas about bubble growth, magma flow and other processes inside the conduit. But in the past few years there have been attempts to include more details about viscosity, diffusion and other factors, in the hope of predicting how and when real volcanoes will erupt.
In 1993 geophysicists Alex Proussevitch and Dork Sahagian, now at the University of New Hampshire, Durham, published the most sophisticated model to date. Their equations demonstrated in detail what many researchers had suspected: the viscosity of the magma is crucial. For gas to escape, it must diffuse through the magma and collect in bubbles. But to form and grow, the bubbles must battle to push their walls out into the thick, viscous magma. The greater the viscosity, the harder it is for the bubbles to form and grow, and the more likely it is that the gas will be trapped in the magma long enough to provoke an explosion at the surface. If the magma is runny, as in Hawaiian volcanoes, gas bubbles can grow and move easily through the liquid. As a result, the gas dissipates quickly, and magma reaching the surface simply oozes down the long sloping flanks of the volcano.
Today, Proussevitch and Sahagian have improved their model so that they can estimate how much ash and rock will erupt, as well as other variables such as the speed and duration of the eruption. "We are very close to prediction of eruption time and style," says Proussevitch.
But to make reliable predictions, the models need accurate information. Several labs are working on ways to measure magma viscosity, at least for past eruptions. For instance, Don Dingwell and other scientists at the University of Bayreuth in Germany melt rock samples in furnaces and then carefully measure viscosity by prodding the melted rock with a rod. Other groups time the descent of a metal sphere through magma. Moreover, seismologists can roughly sketch the size and location of magma chambers, and geochemists can get a reasonable idea of a magma's chemistry from certain crystals in solidified volcanic rock.
Fragmented picture
But in spite of Proussevitch's optimism, at least one large gap remains. Although bubble formation is certainly important, there is also the question of exactly how the subterranean magma changes from a bubbly liquid to an explosive cloud of rock and dust-a process called fragmentation. Without a good physical understanding of this process, the models will always struggle. "We're still waiting," says Proussevitch.
Fragmentation guarantees a violent eruption. But geologists agree only on the basic details of how it happens. As water vapour fills the bubbles, fewer and fewer water molecules remain dissolved to lubricate the magma, making it even stiffer. Even the mere presence of bubbles makes the magma more viscous, just as whipping air into egg whites thickens them. Finally, the force of the growing bubbles exceeds the strength of the surrounding magma. "Then you have trouble," says Dingwell. The magma foam, now too rigid to deform safely, splits into chunks of rock in a hot, dusty cloud of gas, which erupts from the surface at the speed of sound.
How exactly does the magma fragment? "That's a real black hole," says Oded Navon, a geologist at Hebrew University of Jerusalem who studies bubble growth. So far, the models tend to assume that fragmentation happens when the foam expands and the films of magma between bubbles stretch so thin that they burst. In Proussevitch and Sahagian's model, the magma simply fragments when the bubble concentration reaches 70 to 80 per cent.
But the picture could be much more complicated. An alternative theory hinges on the fact that liquids can sometimes act like solids. For instance, glass flows like a liquid, albeit extremely slowly, but you can still smash it if you hit it sharply. The same is true of molten rock. "Hit the stuff quick enough," says Dingwell, "and it will break."
What could hit the magma and cause it to fragment? One possibility would be a sudden, rapid expansion of the bubbles, perhaps because of a drop in pressure. However, Steve Sparks, a volcanologist at the University of Bristol, has calculated that this would not be enough to shatter the magma. Dingwell says that the additional force needed to shatter it could come from other sources such as a collapsing lava dome.
If magma breaks apart as a brittle solid, then predicting the conditions necessary for explosive eruptions is easy, says Dingwell. Brittle failure is a function of viscosity, which can be calculated from the temperature and chemistry of magma. This would reveal how much and how fast the magma would have to be deformed before fragmenting.
The issue might be settled by looking at the microscopic remnants of bubbles, says Dingwell. If most bubble walls appear thinned, then the brittle failure may not apply. Kathy Cashman, a volcanologist at the University of Oregon in Eugene, says she has seen evidence of such ductile thinning in pumice (a porous volcanic rock made of solidified foam) with a scanning electron microscope. However, most ash fragments appear to have broken in a brittle fashion. Either those bubbles could have fragmented as Dingwell envisages, or they may simply have broken on their way through the air. "I'm not convinced that enough people have looked carefully enough at enough samples to know," says Cashman.
Whichever mechanism creates large explosive eruptions, the amount of gas in the magma is also crucial: more gas in the magma means a greater chance of fragmentation and explosion. What's more, different concentrations of gas in the magma chamber could explain why one volcano can switch from "blow" to "flow" and back. For instance, Mount St Helens in Washington switched between lava dome growth and violent eruptions several times between May and October 1980, and geologists are naturally keen to know why.
Watery puzzle
One idea is that the dissolved water could be unevenly distributed in the magma chamber. To check this, Fred Anderson of the University of Chicago and his colleagues examined microscopic pieces of magma from a 700 000-year-old eruption in Long Valley, California, that were trapped inside crystals and so protected from losing their gas. In 1989 the team reported that ash and rock from early explosions came from water-rich magma, while later and slightly less explosive magma was drier.
But the puzzle is that water-rich magma, which should explode, can also erupt calmly. Lava flows from smaller eruptions at Mount Unzen and Mount St Helens contain dark, spindly needles of hornblende, a mineral thought to form only in water-rich magmas. The magma must have lost its water, but how?
One possibility is that gas may leak through cracks in the conduit walls. This could render an explosive magma harmless, depending on the speed of the ascending magma. In 1991, Claude Jaupart and Claude Allègre, volcanologists at the Institut de Physique du Globe in Paris, proposed that if the magma rises quickly, gas won't have time to escape and may explode. A sluggish pace would create a lava dome. That seems to have occurred at Mount St Helens, according to work by Elliot Endo, a geophysicist with the US Geological Survey in Vancouver, Washington. Endo looked at seismic records and found that during lava dome formation, the magma moved considerably more slowly. At present, magma speed can only be determined after the event. But if computers could process the seismic signals faster, it might be possible to track the speed of the magma in real time, says Endo. If so, this could help to predict the likelihood of an explosion.
Gas escapes
However, direct evidence that gas really can be lost in the conduit is still thin on the ground. Mark Stasiuk of the University of Lancaster and his colleagues have recently been looking for clues to gas escape in an extinct volcano at Mule Creek, northeast of Silver City, New Mexico. About 20 million years ago, the volcano erupted violently and then began building a lava dome. Mule Creek followed a common pattern of silica-rich eruptions. Many explode, sending up ash and pumice for hours or days before waning. Then they often switch and slowly extrude a lava dome. However, even then portions of the lava dome may collapse into dangerous flows of hot ash, or the lava dome can explode unexpectedly as at Mount Unzen.
Working with Steve Tait, a volcanologist at the Institut de Physique du Globe in Paris, Stasiuk has examined the inside of the uppermost 300 metres of the volcano at Mule Creek. Half of the volcano had eroded away. Fractures in the rock provide some of the first physical evidence about how gas could escape from lava domes, says Stasiuk.
Some of the fractures at Mule Creek pass from the solidified magma into the rock wall of the conduit. Pieces of fragmented magma inside the fractures suggest they might have violently expelled gas. And solidified bubbles called vesicles seem to line up in the rock. These chains of bubbles may have allowed gas to escape when the rock was molten.
If variations in the gas content of magma really are the key to why some volcanoes explode and why others don't, that could be bad news for the chances of predicting a volcano's behaviour. Mapping the distribution of gas in the magma chamber, at least for the moment, is almost impossible, and geologists would have a similarly hard time estimating the number of cracks in a real conduit.
Disaster or diversion
But there could be a silver lining. Some geologists believe that one day the danger of some volcanoes could be controlled. Proussevitch envisages tunnelling a few hundred meters into the ground to a branch of the magma conduit. Explosives could then open the conduit, relieving the chamber of the overlying weight of 2-3 kilometres of mountain. An instant decompression could release the force of the volcano months or years before a natural eruption. The goal would be to prevent people being evacuated unnecessarily and ensure that no one is caught off guard by the eruption. "It's really very possible and cheap to do," he says.
But many geologists urge caution. "We're a long way off," says Sparks. "It's conceivable, but our level of understanding is still not very sophisticated." One of the major hindrances is mapping the conduit geometry, which would be critical for placing a tunnel and predicting its effects. Existing seismic techniques do not have the resolution needed to locate the conduit accurately, though they can find magma chambers.
Questions of feasibility aside, politics might pose an even bigger problem. "Just imagine the lawsuits if it didn't work out," says Stasiuk. "Nobody would want to set one off. The goal is to be able to say when and how it will happen, then evacuate in plenty of time and watch the fireworks from a safe seat." Tait agrees. "The bottom line is we've got to have a reasonable way of really predicting the evolution of magma," he says. "That will determine whether a volcano is a tourist attraction or a major catastrophe."
*
How to build your own volcano
IN AN explosive eruption, bubbly magma tears itself apart deep underground. Scientists have been recreating this fragmentation in the laboratory. Searching for new ideas, they explode materials such as pine sap, freon, and carbonated water. Some of the results have overturned long-standing theories.
A team led by Brad Sturtevant at the California Institute of Technology and Steve Sparks at the University of Bristol has developed a sophisticated version of an exploding champagne bottle. The team studies explosive bubble growth in shock tubes, cylinders which are used in aeronautical laboratories to create rapid changes in pressure. Pressure inside the tube is increased and large amounts of CO2 are forced into the water. When a computer-controlled knife punctures the aluminium lid, pressure suddenly drops and CO2 escapes from the water into bubbles. The foam expands and shoots out of the tube into a large tank in fractions of a second. "It goes whoosh," says Heidy Mader, a physicist at the University of Bristol, "and that's all you see."
High-speed cameras reveal more detail. Pictures published in 1994 clearly showed that the foam rapidly accelerates and then fragments-exactly the opposite of the accepted model. The experiments can also illuminate the origin of volcanic deposits. By creating an explosion from acetone and pine sap, Jeremy Phillips at Bristol produced stretched bubbles similar to those found in pumice, and previously thought to have deformed while flying through the air. If the bubbles deform while travelling up the conduit, as the experiment suggests, the increase in surface area as a result of stretching should increase the diffusion of water vapour into the bubble, possibly leading to a runaway effect.
Recent experiments with the Caltech equipment have created longer-lasting eruptions. For the first time in the laboratory, Mader and colleagues have observed bubble-rich liquid flowing up the tube in pulses. These variations in eruption rate resemble those of real volcanoes, she says. In the past, geologists have speculated that sudden erosion of the conduit or an elastic magma chamber could be responsible for such pulses. But the simulations suggest that changing patterns of bubble growth could alter the eruption strength, says Mader.
The main challenge for researchers is applying insights from laboratory simulations to real volcanoes. "We can't guarantee what we see in the lab reflects what we see in nature," says Mader. "That's an immense headache." For example, the simulations create foams with 100 000 times fewer bubbles per cubic metre than those observed in pumice or volcanic glass, suggesting that rates of gas escape and foam acceleration could be much greater in real eruptions. And the tube is far shorter than a real volcanic conduit.
Laboratory simulations have not yet led to mathematical equations describing fragmentation, but they have provided new ideas about what happens when bubbles rush out of solution and propel the magma to the surface. "The most useful thing these experiments do," says Mader, "is make people think."
Erik Stokstad 
Erik Stokstad is a freelance science writer

*
Yucca Mountain could become nuclear volcano.
vol 175 issue 2357 - 24 August 2002, page 10
IF A volcano ever erupted beneath the planned nuclear waste repository at Yucca Mountain in Nevada it could cause a devastating explosion that sent high-level nuclear waste spewing into the atmosphere.
Yucca Mountain lies about 145 kilometres north-west of Las Vegas, within an active volcanic field. An eruption at the site is considered extremely unlikely, but it is possible. There are six craters within 20 kilometres of the site, including Lathrop Wells volcano, which formed by eruptions just 80,000 years ago. A study in 2000 estimated that there was a 1 in 1000 chance of an eruption at the site during the 10,000 years it will take for the radioactivity of the waste stored there to dissipate. And a recent report suggests that a more active cluster of volcanoes 100 kilometres to the north could be an even bigger threat (New Scientist, 20 April, p 11).
Now Andrew Woods of the BP Institute at the University of Cambridge and his colleagues have found that if an eruption occurred beneath the site, a rising sheet of magma could burst into the proposed storage tunnels 200 to 300 metres below the surface. The pressure in the hollow tunnels would be much lower than in the surrounding rock, so once the magma broke through it would gush into the tunnels at tens or hundreds of metres per second. The heat would be enough to deform and rupture the 7-centimetre-thick walls of the waste canisters in just 20 minutes, the researchers say.
Worse, if the storage tunnels were open to the main access tunnel, this could act as an easy escape route for the magma to reach the surface, sending nuclear waste several miles skyward in an explosive eruption. According to Woods's model, even if the tunnels were blocked, the magma could still build up enough pressure to break through to the surface. The study, which was funded by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, is published in Geophysical Research Letters (DOI: 10.1029/2002GL014665).
The effort to determine whether Yucca Mountain would be a safe place to stash more than 75,000 tonnes of high-level nuclear waste has lasted more than 20 years and cost over $4 billion. The US Congress approved the site earlier this year, and last month President Bush signed a bill giving it the green light. But the state of Nevada is fiercely opposed and has five lawsuits pending against it. And the Department of Energy must still apply for a licence from the Nuclear Regulatory Commission to store waste underground at Yucca Mountain - a process that could last up to five years.
Volcanoes aren't the only threat that has Nevada on edge about the plans for Yucca Mountain. Earthquakes and rising groundwater could also bring radioactive material to the surface.


Betsy Mason
San Francisco

*
Something stirs on Mount St Helens: When Mount St Helens erupted a decade ago, it blasted the forests from its slopes. Now the devastated volcano is beginning to show signs of life.
vol 126 issue 1717 - 19 May 90
IN 20 MARCH 1980 at 1548 hours a needle jumped on a seismograph at the University of Washington in Seattle. The machine had detected the first in a series of moderate-sized earthquakes that heralded the awakening of Mount St Helens after nearly a century of slumber. More quakes followed in quick succession. Three days later, instruments at dozens of monitoring stations were recording as many as 40 quakes an hour. 
The mountain rumbled, growled, and shivered. On 27 March a plume of ash and steam spewed 6 kilometres into the air. This tentative eruption turned the mountain's snow-capped peak a sooty black. Now, dirty and cracked, the mountain continued to flex its muscles. Soon a huge, prophetic bulge began to grow on its north slope. 
Finally, on 18 May, Mount St Helens obliged the hundreds of reporters, tourists, and scientists who had gathered for the 'volcano watch'. At 0832 hours, an earthquake measuring 5.1 on the Richter scale shook the mountain, dislodged its misshapen north face, and triggered an explosive blast 500 times as great as that which destroyed Hiroshima. 
Within seconds, the blast blew down, shredded, or scorched 500 square kilometres of forest. A plume of ash, cinder and pulverised rock rose some 25 kilometres into the sky, turning day into night. When the blowing material fell to Earth, it left deposits of coarse ash, or tephra, more than a metre thick near the volcano. Hundreds of kilometres to the northeast, traces of tephra smudged the ground. 
Minutes after the eruption, fragments of pumice and gas, heated to 600 Degree C, poured from the ruptured dome and scoured the flanks of the mountain. Choking mud flows of boulders, sediment and melted glacial water swept down the Toutle River to the north and the Muddy River and Pine Creek to the south and east. The collapse of the north face of the mountain produced an avalanche of debris that filled 60 square kilometres of the North Fork of the Toutle River valley to a depth of 45 metres within 10 minutes. 
When the temperatures fell and the dust settled, scientists boarded US Forest Service helicopters to inspect the damage. 'It looked like a moonscape,' says Lawrence Bliss, a botanist and leader of a multidisciplinary team of researchers from the University of Washington sent to study the biological effects of the eruption. 'I really wondered several times if I had lost my colour vision,' recalls John Edwards, a zoologist at the university, of his first view of the stark black-and-white landscape. 
Because the mountain appeared so utterly devoid of life, the scientists had the rare opportunity to watch the reorganisation from scratch of a vast ecological system. It was a massive, ecological experiment provided free of charge. The rapidly assembled team began by pulling together what was known about the ecology of Mount St Helens before it erupted. The mountain itself is a relatively young volcano, about 40 000 years old. It is part of the active Cascade Range which is linked to other mountain ranges that, in turn, stretch south through Oregon and California. 
Before it blew 400 metres off its top, Mount St Helens had an elevation of 2950 metres. Vegetation was sparse above the timberline, but it was 'struggling its way back up the mountain', recovering from previous eruptions, says Jerry Franklin, a forest ecologist in the team. The rest of the mountain was covered by evergreen forest. At lower altitudes, Douglas fir and western hemlock dominated; at higher elevations, true firs (species of Abies) and mountain hemlock. 'These were magnificent forests composed of mature trees 75 to 150 centimetres in diameter and 40 to 70 metres tall,' said Franklin. 
Substantial areas of the virgin forest along the north slope had been logged during the previous 30 years, however, and there were several plantations in the western half of what was to become the area hardest hit by the blast. Yet in the undisturbed forest, subalpine meadows and clear, cold streams formed the only breaks in the old-growth forest. 
The animals living in the volcano's forests, meadows and waters were typical of the Cascadian fauna. There were, for example, Roosevelt elk and Columbia black-tailed deer in the woods, silver salmon and rainbow trout in the streams, and many species of small mammals and birds. 
The first, and most surprising, discovery was that there were survivors even in the most devastated areas: the eruption had not extinguished the diversity of life. Along ridges facing away from the direction of the blast, for instance, small saplings lay bent to the ground, covered by snow 1 to 2 metres deep. This blanket of ice and snow protected many of the young trees from instant destruction by the heat, ash and ferocious winds of the volcanic blast. 
If the snow had been heavier that year, more small trees would probably have survived, says Thomas Hinckley, a tree physiologist in the team. 'But had the eruption occurred a month later, a greater number of trees closer to the mountain that are green today would have been dead.' 
Many seedlings planted around the edges of the blast zone also survived the explosion. The survivors were well rooted and had enough foliage left unscathed peeking from the ash layer to continue photosynthesis. Stands of untoppled mountain hemlock and Pacific silver fir formed a ring around the flattened forests. These survived because they stood in the lee of ridges and gullies which deflected the blast. 
The dense snowpack provided refuge for many smaller plants, notably lupins and weedy species such as common firewood and pearly everlasting. Below ground, burrowing animals such as the pocket gopher and many subterranean insects escaped death. 
The unexpected behaviour of the insect survivors first alerted the investigators to the fact that something peculiar was happening on Mount St Helens: species were not recolonising the bleak mountain slopes as they should. 'If you read any textbook on ecology, you read that, first, you get plants growing and then herbivore insects growing on the plants. That provides the basis for the predators, the scavengers, and the parasites,' explains Edwards. 'But in fact St Helens turned that upside down.' 
According to Rick Sugg, an entomologist at the University of Washington, as soon as the dust settled, invertebrate pioneers began to arrive on the barren surface of the central blasted zone. They emerged from logs that had lain under the snow, climbed up out of the tephra or blew in on the wind. More than a thousand species arrived, but those able to live more than a few days were mainly small ground beetles belonging to the genus Bembidion and wolf spiders. 
The beetles and spiders thrived on a diet of small arthropods falling from the sky. 'Insect fallout' is a normal part of Cascadian ecology; it consists of millions of dead and living flies, bugs, spiders and beetles that the prevailing wind picks up in the lowlands and deposits at higher elevations. Studies on nearby Mount Rainier show that on a typical summer day, between 8 and 10 tonnes of insects lie on its high snowy peak. With such a plentiful food supply, the scavengers did not need to wait for plants to revegetate the slopes. 
The traditional first colonisers were not long in arriving, however. A few weeks after the blast, plants began to reclaim the barren slopes. But they, too, did not behave as predicted. According to Bliss, the plants did not appear in the same order as they would after a major disturbance such as a fire or logging. Then, the first plants to appear are annuals, followed by short-lived perennials that last one or two years, and, finally, the long-lived perennials. 
On Mount St Helens, annuals able to adapt to the changed conditions were rare and so they played little part in recolonisation. Instead, one of the most important early colonists was the lupin, a perennial that lives for about five years. Lupins that endured the eruption acted as nurse plants for pearly everlasting and fireweed. These species, which had previously colonised logged parts of the mountain, were already able to cope with harsh conditions. The lupins helped them to establish by capturing their small, windblown seeds, trapping fine silt and, because they are legumes, by adding nitrogen to the leached soil. The lupin patches created their own small ecosystem, with aphids, ants and other insects. Even rodents travelled long distances across the volcanic landscape to reach the patches. The slow expansion of these oases suggests that one day many of them will grow into fully recovered meadows. 
Meanwhile, underground, other changes benefited the lupin patches. According to Fiorenzo Ugolini, a soil scientist at the University of Washington, a primitive soil began to form beneath the armour-like surface of the pumice plains soon after the eruption. The hard outer crust, known as desert pavement, formed quickly as the volcanic materials were weathered by wind, rain and the acidic gases emitted by the still sputtering volcano. The crust consists of closely packed pumice stones, layered 3 to 40 centimetres deep. 
Desert pavement does not hinder the formation of new soil. 'It's an example of nature protecting itself, in this case from further erosion,' Ugolini says. Similar desert pavements, in Antarctica for example, have protected fragile soils for millions of years. Further, as the pavement weathers, it provides nutrients to the soil below. According to Ugolini, 13 of the 16 elements plants need to grow are found in the desert pavement of Mount St Helens. Finally, the porous pumice holds rainwater and offers shelter for seeds. 
As terrestrial plants and animals struggled to live on the moonscape of the mountain, aquatic creatures faced equally dismal prospects in the lakes and ponds. Few vertebrates living around Spirit Lake survived the tremendous heat of the eruption and the crushing mud flows that followed. 'Bodies of water were basically soup - cooked vegetation,' said Edwards. This biological 'sewage' was a terrible habitat for anything but bacteria and mosquito larvae, which flourished in the broth of rapidly multiplying microorganisms. 'The ponds and the lakes produced a prodigious pulse of mosquitoes the first year,' Edwards reports. 'They cleaned up the water and then disappeared.' 
Return of the exiles 
Gradually, over the past 10 years, reptiles and amphibians from outside the devastated area have journeyed to the lakes and ponds renewed by the mosquitoes. The return of fish has been more difficult. Clearly, there could be no natural recolonisation in closed bodies of water where there had been no survivors. Not everyone was keen on the idea of helping the process of recovery by reintroducing the fish. According to Franklin, the fish question created a controversy between scientists and state wildlife officials that continues to this day: 'There's been a conflict between getting a sport fishery right back on all the lakes and wanting to reserve those lakes to see how they develop under natural conditions - the scientific objective.' So far, the compromise has been to restock some of the lakes outside the boundaries of the Mount St Helens National Volcanic Monument, a protected area established in 1982 as a resource for scientific study. 
No similar tension arose over the return of big game to Mount St Helens. Large mammals came back voluntarily within weeks of the eruption to browse on the emerging vegetation. To ensure that populations would return to their original size, hunting was restricted within the reserve. Biologists predict that the number of game animals will continue to increase until evergreen trees begin to outgrow and replace the forage plants. 
Small mammals did not recover so well. Of some 32 species living on the mountain at the time of the blast, only 14 have survived in the area. Many animals that were not killed or injured outright, died off slowly from a lack of food, water or shelter. Peter Frenzen, the Monument Scientist funded by the government, points out that those species that reappeared, such as the deer mouse and the golden-mantled ground squirrel, are adaptable generalists, with no very specific requirements for food or habitat. 
Today, ten years after the quake and explosion that woke sleepers as far away as Vancouver in Canada, visitors to the Mount St Helens Monument can view the full spectrum of damage and recovery. The pumice plains still look bleak and forbidding, and the barren ground is relieved only by isolated islands of lupins. On the edge of the pumice plains, however, dogwood and beadlily, elder and huckleberry grow alongside the lupins, pearly everlasting and fireweed. Frenzen believes that willows, hardwoods and cottonwood trees will eventually appear among the scattered seedlings of coniferous trees now emerging from the rubble of boulders and stumps. 
The forests bordering the flattened zone have shrugged off the persistent layer of ash that slowed their growth for the first two years. They have endured droughts, chemical changes in the soil, diseases and acid rain, all linked to the eruption. 'Within the next 50 years, as the young trees mature, the weed and shrub dominated landscape will begin to take on the appearance of a young coniferous forest,' predicts Frenzen. 'Within a hundred years, a mature forest will cover most of the area. Within two hundred years, the area will begin to resemble the old-growth forest found in undisturbed portions of the Monument.' Just in time, perhaps, for Mount St Helens to wake again and begin another explosive episode of fire, ash and devastation. 
NATURE VERSUS NURTURE: THE UNHELPING HAND OF SCIENCE 
WHEN it comes to repairing a massively disturbed ecosystem, nature knows best. Many scientists monitoring the recovery of Mount St Helens believe that most of the human efforts to speed up the process have failed. For example, artificially seeding the area with grasses to control erosion did little good. Scattered from the air, many of the seeds washed off the steep ash-covered slopes. In retrospect, many scientists feel that the efforts may even have done more harm than good. 
Likewise, removing woody debris from stream channels, banks and floodplains did not always assist recovery of the aquatic systems. Along the banks of some rivers and streams, restoration was held back because the debris could have provided much needed protection and 'seed traps' for species that would naturally encourage revival of the stream. 
Early on, scientists assumed that salvaging the logs blown down by the eruption would be beneficial, uncovering surviving plants and allowing old soil and ash to mix. Subsequent analysis suggests that where trees were not manually replanted, the density and growth of surviving plants has been higher on sites that were not salvaged. 
The message from Mount St Helens, the scientists say, is that human intervention is warranted only in commercially logged areas, or where communities and settlements are clearly at risk from floods or other incidents that follow in the wake of eruptions.
LEIGH DAYTON

*
The rise and fall of Mount Etna: A volcano's shape can determine where on its slopes people are at the greatest risk from eruptions of lava and ash. Monitoring and interpreting these subtle distortions has proved worthwhile on Etna; the same techniques could save lives across the world.
vol 125 issue 1706 - 03 March 90,
MOUNT ETNA has traditionally been thought of as a safe volcano. Because of the fertile volcanic soils, more than 20 per cent of Sicilians live on its slopes. Major eruptions, happening at least once a decade, destroy homes and farm buildings; vines, olive groves and lemon trees vanish beneath lava and ash. The swellings and sinkings of the surface of this volcano hold the key to understanding how it erupts. Precise measuring of Etna's shape could allow us to predict better both eruptions and the damaging landslides that they may trigger. 
But the methods of prediction refined on Etna do not help the people of Sicily alone. The great majority of the world's active volcanoes are situated in developing countries. Competition for living space and valuable farmland mean that more and more people are living within the danger zones of these volcanoes. The methods that volcanologists have used on Etna could be applied across the world, making warnings of eruptions more reliable and saving lives. 
Rising from the east coast of Sicily, between the cities of Messina to the north and Catania to the south, Etna is an impressive volcano by any standard. Its summit stands 3375 metres above sea level, while its circumference of around 100 kilometres encloses over 1100 square kilometres of lava, ash and cinders. Etna is the largest active volcano in Europe, and the largest built on continental crust anywhere in the world. The four summit craters continually release gases, and there are significant eruptions of lava every two or three years. The last sign of life was in October last year, when lava flows threatened towns and villages high on the slopes of the volcano, and heavy falls of ash blocked major roads in northeast Sicily. 
It is the knowledge that something is always happening, or about to happen, that attracts researchers to Etna in large numbers. Compared with many other volcanoes, it is easy to reach, having good roads and an airport nearby, so that a monitoring team can travel to the volcano quickly should it erupt unexpectedly. In spite of a concerted research effort over the past two decades by British and European scientists, much remains to be discovered about its internal plumbing, the system of cracks and pipes through which molten rock, known as magma, makes its way to the surface. Unlike the Hawaiian volcanoes, Mauna Loa and
Kilauea, which stand on thinner ocean crust, and have fairly simple plumbing systems, Etna seems to be more complex. It has changed several times since volcanic activity started there about 300 000 years ago. The magma which erupts from Etna in the form of lava, ash and scoria (a form of lava containing many bubbles of air, looking like cinders), forms by melting of rock in the Earth's mantle, the layer immediately beneath the crust, at depths more than 30 kilometres below the surface. 
In 1980, Alastair Sharpe, with colleagues from the University of Cambridge and the University of California at Los Angeles, used deep seismic sounding techniques to show that Etna's magma does not rise directly from the mantle to the surface. Instead, it accumulates in a network of small fractures, forming a reservoir of magma at a depth of around 20 kilometres, near the base of the crust. From this reservoir, magma rises in a near-continuous column towards the summit region. Gases that were dissolved in the molten rock when it was deeper in the Earth escape through open vents around the summit. On occasions, these craters fill or partly fill with magma to form lava lakes, or they may erupt explosively, throwing out molten rock, cinder and ash. 
The most destructive eruptions on Etna, however, take place on the slopes of the volcano. They tend to happen a few times per decade, sometimes accompanied by earthquakes, or eruptions from a crater near the summit. These flank eruptions arise when magma beneath the summit exerts such pressure on the walls of the pipe or fissure in which it flows that the rock cracks. The fracture then fills with magma and grows horizontally and outwards towards the surface. If the pressure of magma rising from below is sufficient, the fracture will break the surface of the ground some distance from the summit, and molten rock will erupt from the fissure. In some cases, however, the magma does not reach the surface, but solidifies below ground to form a body of rock called an intrusion. Intrusions that come from these fissures have a particular shape, forming upright, usually vertical, blade-like sheets of igneous rock. They are known as dykes, and have played a major role throughout much of the history of Etna by feeding eruptions on its flanks. There are hundreds of ancient, solidified dykes, superbly exposed in the cliffs surrounding the Valle del Bove. This is a caldera, a large volcanic crater formed by collapse or explosion on the southeast slope of Etna. 
Most of the major lava eruptions in historic times have come from dykes feeding eruptive fissures. The greater the depth at which a dyke forms, the lower the altitude of the resulting fissure at the surface and, generally speaking, the greater the damage to property, because more people live on the lower slopes. One of the most extensive eruptions of lava in recent history happened in 1669, when a fissure stretched from the summit area to the village of Nicolosi some 15 kilometres away and 2400 metres below. In places, the crack was 2 metres wide, containing glowing lava, according to contemporary reports. Lava from this eruption reached the coast and destroyed part of the city of Catania, 12 kilometres from the vent, after flowing over the city walls. 
Researchers now hope to be able to predict the areas at highest risk from this sort of eruption by monitoring gravity and magnetic changes, seismic activity, thermal anomalies, the chemistry of the gases coming from the vents and the distortion of the volcano's surface that results from the flow of molten rock below ground. Ideally, they will acquire data that can be added to maps which show the degree of hazard for different areas around a volcano. This takes into account features such as valleys, which might channel a lava flow towards a particular village, and so increase the local risk. A technique for measuring the movement of the surface above rising magma was developed on the volcanoes of Hawaii and Japan (see Box overleaf). It has since proved valuable in predicting the time and place of eruptions on Etna. 
Volcanologists studying ground deformation on Etna want to identify bodies of magma rising beneath the summit region, and dykes growing away from the summit towards its flanks. In 1975, John Murray, now at the Open University in Britain, set up a line of markers across the summit of the volcano. He then surveyed their positions twice each year, and discovered that vertical displacements of bench marks to the south of the summit reflected the movement of molten rock within the volcano. All the surface around the summit rose, as if inflated like a balloon, when bodies of magma moved upwards immediately beneath it; the slopes deflated after magma erupted. 
Murray recorded a pattern of inflation in the early 1980s and began to suspect that an eruption on the southern flank might be imminent. In order to provide more detail on the deformation of the ground associated with this expected eruption, Andy Pullen of Imperial College, London, established a second network of markers in 1981, to measure horizontal deformation on the upper part of the southern flank. This network, which is now operated by the Volcanic Studies Unit of the West London Institute, has been considerably enlarged in the past few years to provide increased monitoring of activity in the area. 
Murray's suspicion proved well founded in March 1983, when an eruptive fissure fed by dykes cut through Pullen's survey network, generating extensive flows of lava which threatened villages on Etna's southern slopes. This eruption galvanised the authorities into an attempt at diverting the flow using explosives. Although the lavas stopped flowing soon afterwards, researchers are still debating whether or not this was simply coincidence. 
After the opening of the 1983 fissure, Murray and Pullen remeasured both their surveying networks. They found that they could trace the path of the dyke responsible for feeding the eruption, and, by calculating the distortion of the ground that they would expect above different intrusions, find out its size, shape and depth below ground. 
In 1975, James Dieterich of the US Geological Survey, and Robert Decker of Dartmouth College in New Hampshire, used computer models to show that the precise form of patterns of uplift and sinking above a dyke underground could help researchers to define the height, depth, and tilt of the intrusion. The surface above a dyke distorts in a distinctive pattern as the molten rock below squeezes away from the core of the volcano; a long narrow zone immediately above the intrusion sinks, and the ground to either side rises.
Predictions fall short 
In the case of the 1983 dyke, the central zone sank by as much as 125 centimetres, and the sides rose by up to 40 centimetres. Dieterich and Decker calculated a displacement curve for a vertical dyke 950 metres high, starting 475 metres below ground, which almost matched the observations made on Etna. The actual dyke was probably about this size and shape. But the surface above the centre of the 1983 dyke had sunk more than the model predicted. This is because the rocks have not stretched in quite the way that the model assumed. Dieterich and Decker's model applies only to elastic deformation, and does not take into account other types of distortion, such as faulting and fracturing, which probably cause the extra depression above the dyke on Mount Etna. 
Murray's observations of vertical displacement, supported by data on horizontal deformation derived by Pullen, showed that the 1983 dyke grew from beneath the summit towards the southeast. As it approached the rim of the Valle del Bove caldera, it deviated to run in a southerly direction, parallel to the western cliff wall. Lava erupted when the dyke met the surface at a height of about 2500 metres. 
In the network to measure horizontal displacement, bench marks on either side of the path of the dyke had become farther apart; the intrusion of molten rock below ground had fractured and displaced the surface above by about 2 metres horizontally, in addition to the vertical movements. By modelling the movements of all the stations in his network relative to a base station which he considered stable, Pullen demonstrated that this displacement was not uniformly distributed on either side of the dyke. Instead, most of the horizontal distortion was to the east of the dyke. In particular, a huge block of the western cliff wall of the Valle del Bove had moved outward. 
The reasons for this became clear after Pullen and I carried out a series of experiments at the West London Institute. We made solid gelatine models of volcanoes in different shapes, and injected them with coloured water to represent magma rising to the surface. The water rises until it builds up sufficient pressure to crack the gelatine. It then flows outward in the cracks, forming vertical sheets which represent dykes. One gelatine cone represented Etna, with a steep side resembling the cliff wall of the Valle del Bove caldera. Dykes changed their paths as they approached the 'cliff wall', and ran parallel to it. This was exactly the behaviour of the 1983 feeder dyke adjacent to the Valle del Bove western cliff wall. Fissures from the 1978-9 and the 1985 eruptions also followed paths which turned to run parallel to the cliff wall of the caldera. K K The explanation for this turns out to be straightforward. Both the steep side of the gelatine model, and the Valle del Bove cliff wall, represent vertical or near-vertical surfaces which are 'falling outward' under the force of gravity. This creates tension in the gelatine and the rocks near the cliffs. Fractures form most easily parallel to the vertical surface because of the extra gravitational pull. The shape of Mount Etna is an important control on where and how lava escapes in this sort of flank eruption. 
Magma on the move 
As long as magma continues to rise to the southeast of the summit, dykes growing eastward or southeastward stand a good chance of being diverted to run parallel to the rim of the Valle del Bove. This poses a double threat to the people who live and work around the volcano; they are in danger from lava, and potentially also from landslides. Subterranean magma is being channelled southwards, towards the centre of tourism on Etna. Despite the fact that lava erupted during 1983 and destroyed parts of the cable car system and several hotels and restaurants on the upper slopes, construction in the area continued. The eruption in 1985 also failed to halt the building activity. In October last year, a network of fractures 6 kilometres long, which started near the summit, cut across the main road just to the east of the tourist village. 
Of potentially greater importance is the fact that a huge block of the cliff wall of the Valle del Bove is moving east because of the dykes which repeatedly inject along its rim. The block moved 2 metres during the 1983 eruption, and another 80 centimetres in 1985. The fracture system which opened in October 1989 was formed by yet another dyke, similar to the earlier intrusions. Although in this case magma did not reach the surface, and there was no eruption of lava, the rim of the caldera moved a further 80 centimetres east - a total displacement of 3.6 metres over seven years. If more dykes form in this area, the rim of the caldera will become increasingly unstable. If the cliff collapses in a piecemeal fashion, generating landslides which are confined to the Valle del Bove, then there is little risk to the people of local towns and villages. This part of the caldera rim forms a very straight cliff, however, suggesting that past collapse may have involved the whole of the western side at one time. Such a fall today could generate landslides with the potential to reach the densely populated coast of Sicily east of the caldera. The monitoring programme would have to be continued or even stepped up, before scientists could assess the risks of such an event occurring without warning on Etna. 
The 1980 blast from Mount St Helens, and the Nevada del Ruiz volcanic disaster in Columbia during 1985, have shown the destructive power of landslides and mudflows produced during volcanic eruptions. Measuring the way the ground has deformed on Etna has proved to be a valuable method of predicting its eruptions, and assessing the risk of landslides. For most of the world's active volcanoes, in contrast, the prediction record is either poor or nonexistent. This may be due partly to the difficulty of understanding volcanoes which have complex plumbing systems; it is more likely to result from a poor monitoring programme, and a lack of funds.
Tracking the tilt that tells when a mountain could blow its top
THE LINK between the way the surface of the ground deforms, and the movement of magma underground, was first established in Japan during the early part of this century. In 1914, the Japanese geophysicist Fusakichi Omori decided that the vertical movements of a series of bench marks in a survey network around the volcano Sakura-jima, near Kagoshima in southern Japan, were caused by the volcano swelling before it erupted, then subsiding after lava flowed out. 
Similar movements were recorded at Kilauea on Hawaii in the late 1950s, using a system of tiltmeters designed to monitor small variations in the height of the ground. This apparatus was simple but effective, consisting of tubes filled with water, arranged in a triangle and connected at each apex to hollow pots mounted on concrete pillars. Changes in the relative height of the three pillars affected the level of water in each pot, and allowed tilts as small as 1 millimetre in a kilometre to be measured.
Ground movements measured using this system, and later more sophisticated networks of tiltmeters, showed that before Kilauea erupts, its summit usually swells, causing the ground to tilt outward, away from the summit crater. Following an eruption, the volcano deflates; the summit region subsides, and the gradient of the upper slopes decreases. 
Horizontal movements of the ground associated with the flow of magma underground were first recorded on Kilauea in the 1920s by RM Wilson. He also undertook a triangulation survey which involved repeatedly measuring the positions of bench marks around the summit, so that he could compute any horizontal offsets between them. Using this technique, Wilson successfully recorded the deflation following Kilauea's eruption in 1924, which caused a 1-metre horizontal move ment of his bench marks towards the centre of subsidence. 
In 1964, the measurement of horizontal ground movement on active volcanoes was revolutionised by Robert Decker of Dartmouth College, New Hampshire, and his colleagues, using electronic methods to establish precisely the distances between stations in a triangulation network on Kilauea. The advent of this equipment not only allowed more accurate measurement of horizontal displacement of the ground, but also made surveying much quicker. This system of monitoring horizontal ground movement is now in use on active volcanoes all over the world, and has been employed in recent years to monitor the movement of magma within Mount Etna. 
I and my colleagues from the Volcanic Studies Unit at the West London Institute have used both precise levelling surveys and electronic distance measurement on Mount Etna. With levelling, we can detect changes in height between survey stations of less than a centimetre. 
For the distance measuring, we use an instrument known as an electronic distance meter, which bounces a beam of laser light, infrared, or microwave radiation off a reflector. This enables us to determine the precise distance between marker stations to within a few centimetres over 40 kilometres or more. With this quick, convenient method, we can detect the small but significant movements of the ground. 
Bill McGuire is head of the Volcanic Studies Unit at the West London Institute.
BILL MCGUIRE

*
Geologists race to catch volcano under the sea.
vol 128 issue 1742 - 10 November 90

An international 'flying squad' of geophysicists has set out to catch an undersea eruption in action for the first time. The group, made up of Icelanders, Britons and Americans, left for the Rejkyanes Ridge, to the South of Iceland, last week, hoping to find out what happens during and immediately after a volcanic eruption in deep water. 
The first signs of something amiss on the sea floor came on Tuesday last week, when geophysicists noticed a significant pattern of earthquakes off Iceland. 'We see similar patterns in Iceland from time to time, and there they indicate magma (molten rock) on the move.' said Joe Cann of the University of Leeds. 
On Friday, Cann met the rest of the team in Rekjavik to board a research ship, courtesy of Iceland's Ministry of Fisheries. The ship sailed immediately for the spot at the edge of Iceland itself. 
This is not the team's first attempt to catch an eruption. Eighteen months ago, following a similar swarm of earthquakes off Iceland, marine geologists tried to organise a ship, but failed to get hold of the necessary instruments in time.
*
Mount Mayon blows without warning.
vol 137 issue 1860 - 13 February 93, page 8
Inadequate monitoring equipment may have prevented Filipino vulcanologists predicting the eruption of Mount Mayon last week. The sudden expulsion of hot ash and mud on 2 February killed more than 60 people and caused widespread damage around the 2462-metre volcano in the central Philippines. 
'We need more sophisticated instruments,' according to Rene Solidum, a geologist with Phivolcs, the Philippine Institute of Vulcanology and Seismology. Solidum admitted that Phivolcs does not have a complete set-up for monitoring the volcano's activity. The institute has three observation stations on the volcano, but only one tiltmeter to detect swelling of the volcano caused by intrusions of magma. 
By contrast, Mount Sakurajima, an active volcano in Japan is wired up with dozens of tiltmeters. One of them, 28 metres long, cost 300 million yen ( £170 000). The prohibitive cost of monitoring instruments highlights the problem developing countries have in adequately funding disaster prediction programmes.
'We need many different ways with multiple instruments to predict discrete volcanic events,' says Hiromu Ikada, a vulcanologist with Hokkaido University. 'If you were to locate tiltmetres near the summit (of Mount Mayon) I think you may be able to detect crustal deformation before an explosion. If there had been more instruments there would have been a better chance of prediction.' 
Geologists at Phivolcs were on the defensive last week as they faced criticism for failing to predict the explosion. The mayor of nearby city of Legaspi even announced that he will sue the institute for damages. 'Our budget is limited,' admits Leonila Bautista of Phivolcs, 'but we know the volcano's behaviour well, and even with more instruments we wouldn't have been able to detect this type of volcanic activity before it happened.'

PETER HADFIELD 
MANILLA

*
Still steaming after all these years.
vol 135 issue 1837 - 05 September 92, page 5
Inside Mount St Helens something stirs. . . . This temperature photograph taken from an aircraft shows fumaroles, the hot steaming vents that indicate the mountain is still rumbling, as white-lipped spots in the central plug of the volcano. The volcano erupted in 1980, devastating a large area of Washington state. Plants and animals have begun to recolonise the slopes of the mountain but it continues to erupt on a small scale - emitting mainly steam. 
This false colour image was put together by geologists at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, combining data gathered by a remote sensing instrument known as TIMS, Thermal Infrared Multispectral Scanner, with a digital elevation model. The scanner, flown aboard NASA aircraft, is extremely sensitive to heat, picking up tiny differences in temperature. Molten lava has a temperature of about 10 000 °C, but this falls to around 50 °C at the surface. A covering of volcanic ash reduces the temperature 'seen' by the scanner still further. 
The pink areas are new deposits of volcanic ash; the orange plug is older material. The bright blue spots inside the fumaroles are concentrations of gas being vented from the volcano. 
Geologists will combine the data from TIMS with maps of the volcano to calculate heat loss in and around the mountain to help predict future eruptions.

*
What's this volcano trying to tell us?
vol 161 issue 2174 - 20 February 1999, page 26

Deep gurgles and belches from far underground could be the early warning volcanologists have been waiting for. Daniel Pendick listens in.
ON THE steamy, tropical slopes of Arenal volcano in Costa Rica, clouds of moisture hang above the trees like a blanket. There's danger in the air too: the volcano's dark cone looms over nearby towns and villages, and has been erupting almost continuously for three decades. Not on the face of it a place that anyone in their right mind would want to climb.
But in 1992, geophysicist Milton Garces did just that, scrambling up Arenal's rainforested slopes to cock an ear at the volcanic vent at the summit. "I sat there in the fog and the rain and listened for about a week," he says. "I heard explosions, I heard hissing, I heard this remarkable chugging sound, like a train. Through all that time I was thinking that I could use these sounds to find out what is happening inside the volcano."
Not many people would have lingered so long on an erupting volcano. For Garces, however, Arenal's angry growls sounded like a whole new way of studying volcanoes. Do the sounds volcanoes make before they blow their top change in some predictable way? Could those sounds help scientists monitor active volcanoes and forecast their deadly eruptions?
Inspired, Garces teamed up with Michael Buckingham, an expert in underwater acoustics at the Scripps Institution of Oceanography in San Diego, California, and set to work developing a computer model that could help answer those questions. The result is the equivalent of a stethoscope for volcanoes. Like a doctor listening for the irregularities in a heartbeat that would betray a faulty valve, they are homing in on the subtle variations in the boiling hearts of volcanoes that show, for example, whether a river of fresh magma charged with explosive gases is surging up from the depths.
Garces, now based at the University of Hawaii at Manoa, has listened to volcanoes from Antarctica to Italy. And his latest results confirm that a volcano's deafening clamour has a promising future in the troubled area of predicting eruptions.
Volcanoes first caught his attention while he was studying underwater acoustics. In 1989, Garces went to the Scripps Institution to work with Buckingham. Here, he became involved in research aimed at detecting volcanic eruptions on the seabed. Underwater volcano hunters, he learnt, wanted to distinguish these eruptions from the confusion of background noise in the ocean. But what is it that makes a volcano sound like a volcano, and what could these noises reveal?
Garces became intrigued by the question, but realised that studying the acoustics of underwater volcanoes wasn't simple: most eruptions occur kilometres down on the seabed, and learning their secrets would be difficult and expensive. There had to be another way.
Volcanoes on dry land produce a cacophony of noise, ranging from high-pitched whooshing and whining to low rumbles of infrasound with frequencies of less than 20 hertz, outside the range of human hearing. "These are the waves that physically shake you," says Garces-much like the roar that you feel in your chest when a jet passes close overhead.
Infrasound, Garces learnt, can reveal a volcano's innermost secrets. Some infrasound is generated near the surface by exploding bubbles of gas and rock- volcanic "belches" that throw magma and other debris into the air. But infrasound also comes from the very heart of a volcano, produced by the turbulent fluid dynamics of magma flows deep beneath the surface. Here, geophysicists believe that oscillating streams of magma or gas bubbles expanding and contracting with changes in pressure may give out deep growls and bellows. Since the magma has a different density to its surroundings, the molten rock traps these sounds and acts like a waveguide, channelling them up through the magma-filled passage called the conduit to the volcano's vent.
These waves of infrasound force the surface of the magma to vibrate, says Steve McNutt, a volcano seismologist from the Geophysical Institute at the University of Alaska in Fairbanks. "It behaves like the head of a drum, radiating sound into the air," he says (see Diagram).
This infrasound is a complex mixture of low frequencies. And because some of it comes from deep inside a volcano, Garces believes that it contains vital information about the processes that trigger eruptions-maybe even telling you how likely a volcano is to blow its top: "There's just an ocean of information in these low frequencies."
Geophysicists already eavesdrop on low-frequency vibrations using seismometers. Many of the processes that generate infrasound inside a volcano also send out waves known as volcanic tremor that race through the ground. Measuring these waves can tell geophysicists much about a volcano, but so far, attempts to use changes in the amount of tremor as a warning of eruption have given mixed results. "It's been useful, but there are big variations in how much tremor you see before an eruption," explains Bruce Julian, a seismologist at the US Geological Survey at Menlo Park in California. "Sometimes you see none at all."
Cracks and fissures.
No one knows why this is. But Garces believes that part of the problem lies with features in the ground beneath a volcano that scatter and distort the seismic waves. "The waves are radiating through a very complicated path that has layers, fissures, and cracks," says Garces. On the other hand, he argues, if you "listen" to a volcano's rumblings by replacing seismometers with microphones, the task becomes considerably easier. "Do your measurements in the atmosphere and you get a much more accurate measure of the physics of the volcanic system," says Garces. "The air is a much simpler material."
The first step in deciphering the complex language of a volcano was to model its physical structure mathematically, using parameters such as the size of the conduit, the rigidity of the bedrock and the gas content of the magma. The model generated an infrasound spectrum that they could compare with the real thing: tweak the parameters until the two spectra matched, and they should have a good idea of what goes on inside the volcano.
Model number one was based on simple physics. To start with, they decided to recreate the short, sharp explosive blasts that occur at the summit of an erupting volcano. The first moment after a blast, a strong shock wave radiates in all directions, like the sonic boom of a jet. This is followed by a low, infrasonic rumble that tapers off gradually.
Garces and Buckingham represented the conduit of a volcano as a cylinder of rock filled with magma. The sharp, percussive boom of the initial blast comes from a sudden burp of gas that explodes near the surface. This creates acoustic waves that ripple out into the magma, bounce around inside the conduit and then die away-producing the long, low rumble that subsides slowly.
Mathematically, this model is almost identical to an organ pipe. Blowing air into an organ pipe creates a broad spectrum of vibrations that bounce back and forth inside. Some vibrations have wavelengths that match the length of the pipe exactly, forcing it to vibrate in resonance. These become louder, while other vibrations with wavelengths that don't match the length of the pipe are lost. Decode this spectrum of sounds and you can learn all about the organ pipe that created them.
By 1994, the two were ready to test their model against real explosions. They chose one of the world's most studied volcanoes, on Stromboli, an island among the Italy's Lipari group. The volcano on Stromboli has been active more or less continuously for about 2000 years. Because it is so well understood, there were real numbers to feed into the model. For example, to represent Stromboli's upper conduit where the explosions occur, Garces used a cylinder 10 metres wide and 100 metres deep. He then added other basics, such as the physical properties of the magma and the strength of the rock surrounding it.
This accounted for the organ pipe, but the model also needed acoustic waves for resonance-and this required explosions. The source of explosive eruptions at Stromboli is believed to be a constriction in the conduit, about 60 metres below the volcanic vent. The constriction acts like the nozzle on a spray can. As magma flows upwards through it, the pressure drops suddenly and volcanic gases come out of solution. This creates gas bubbles that expand quickly. As they grow, changes in pressure force them to oscillate rapidly, blasting acoustic waves into the conduit. "It's like high explosives detonating underwater," says Buckingham. They based this aspect of the model on research on underwater explosions.
Later that year, Garces travelled to Stromboli to record some real explosions to compare with their simulation. With help from the Vesuvian Observatory in Naples, he set up a listening station about 150 metres from an active vent on the west side of the volcano. For eight days, Garces recorded thousands of booming explosions and the long rumble of tremor with an infrasound microphone.
Back in the lab, Garces and Buckingham tweaked the parameters of the model slightly-adjusting the strength of the explosions, for instance, and the amount of gas dissolved in the magma. They were able to re-create the infrasound fingerprint of Stromboli's explosions in striking detail. Buckingham admits that he was surprised that they got such a close match, especially as they were using such a simple model. "Actually, I was amazed," he says.
Garces and Buckingham feel pretty confident that their organ pipe model is on the right track. The four strongest peaks at low frequencies matched, as did the peaks at higher frequencies. It also matched a conspicuous valley in the spectrum that related to how far down in the magma column the explosion source lies. "It's not just one feature-it's a combination of them," Buckingham says. "Sure, you can get one of them to work, but to get more than one is more than coincidence."
But even then, something was missing. While Garces was listening to Stromboli with his microphones, a network of seismometers on the island were picking up the steady background hum of volcanic tremor. The whole island was shaking.
When Garces compared the spectral fingerprint of these tremors to the explosions he recorded, he discovered that the patterns were completely different-as if one throat was singing with two voices. How could this be? "This puzzled me for a very long time," Garces admits.
Eventually, he came up with an explanation. Perhaps the magma in the conduit had separated into two layers, like a thick film of oil floating on top of water. If the densities were sufficiently different, acoustic waves would be reflected at the interface. This would turn the volcanic conduit into two separate organ pipes, one on top of the other. Reverberations from explosions at the surface would be trapped in the upper pipe, while infrasound from tremors deep in the earth would be locked in the lower pipe.
Small gas bubbles, released far below the conduit, are the key to the layering effect, says Garces. The most abundant gases in magma are water vapour and carbon dioxide. As the magma rises, its pressure drops and, just like a freshly-opened bottle of champagne, the gas comes out as bubbles. Carbon dioxide leaves the magma first since it doesn't combine readily with molten rock. But the magma only relinquishes its grip on the water in the last few hundred metres of the conduit. The result is a light, frothy layer of magma that is filled with bubbles of steam, sitting on a layer of denser molten rock.
Loud and clear.
But even this complex picture is an oversimplification. In 1997, Garces went back to Arenal with two seismologists from the University of California in Santa Cruz, Michael Hagerty and Susan Schwartz, to record more tremors and explosions.
What they found was curious. Arenal's frequent explosions of gas and ash always came through loud and clear, but the low growl of the tremor was fickle. Sometimes it seemed muffled or undetectable, as if a thick blanket had been thrown over the volcano, and at other times the low rumblings were clearly detectable.
Garces believes Arenal may operate in two modes. When fresh magma flows slowly up into the conduit, the frothy, spongy layer has time to form on top as the gases fizz out. As they'd already discovered, this traps infrasound beneath it in the denser layer. But if the flow of magma is more vigorous, there's no time for the frothy layer to form. That means that the infrasound from tremor can pass freely through the conduit to the vent, and the microphones can pick it up clearly. It seems that a volcano can behave like one or two organ pipes, depending on how fast magma flows through the volcano.
Complex behaviour like this seems to present Garces's model with a problem. There are thousands of volcanoes on the planet, and they're all as individual as people. They erupt different kinds of magma with different acoustic properties and their plumbing systems are as varied as the sounds they make. "I think volcanoes do all kinds of things to make noise," says Julian. If no two volcanoes are alike, what chance is there of using infrasound to forecast eruptions?
Fortunately for the researchers, it seems that there's a very good one. The infrasound signature of a volcano is especially sensitive to the amount of gas locked up inside its magma. And this gas is critical to the way a volcano behaves. Gases dissolved in the magma provide the driving force behind an eruption ("When volcanoes get violent", New Scientist, 26 October 1996, p 28). The danger is that this gas will come out of solution very fast, burst through the vent in one gigantic blast, spewing lava, rocks and other debris onto nearby towns or villages. "It's the most important parameter. The more gas trapped inside, the more explosive an eruption might be," says Garces.
This is why Garces's acoustic model is so promising. If infrasound tells you that the volume of gas in the magma is increasing rapidly, it could warn you of an impending explosive eruption. "It would be extremely important if you could tell that sort of thing," says Julian. New data seem to confirm that forecasting eruptions using infrasound may soon be possible. In May last year, Garces spent some time recording the boom of infrasound on Sakurajima volcano on Kyushu, one of Japan's southern islands. He found that he could pick out clear changes in the character of the infrasound spectrum before an eruption. "You could definitely see changes in the acoustic signal," he says. "If you can correctly interpret these changes, you could issue a warning."
In the next few years, Garces predicts, volcano models will emerge that can translate volcano sounds into information almost instantaneously. Such a volcanic stethoscope could convert the spectral fingerprint of tremor and explosions into the kind of measurement that would mean a lot for those living close to a volcano-so if the concentration of gas in the magma was rising, for instance, they would be put on alert. "It'll be a couple of years before we can do that," he says. "But we'll get there eventually."
After years of struggling to understand what Arenal was telling him that day in 1992 when he first climbed its slopes, Garces is busier than ever. In the past year he's churned out a flurry of new papers, and thanks to a tour of active volcanoes in Japan, he has a pile of high-quality acoustic recordings to test against the model. And even though no one knows yet whether his model reproduces exactly what happens inside volcanoes, Garces feels he's at least taken the most important first step-listening to volcanoes. "Basically it's been a labour of love for the last five years, trying to get people to understand that this can help us. It was quite frustrating," he says. "But now they're asking me to work with them."

Predicting volcanic activity by monitoring gas bubbles

Daniel Pendick 
Daniel Pendick is a freelance writer and a Knight Fellow in science journalism at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology

*
Prepare for Popo.
vol 171 issue 2310 - 29 September 2001, page 14
A risk map for a Mexican volcano could save thousands of lives.
OFFICIALS are preparing to evacuate tens of thousands of people from around a volcano near Mexico City that is threatening to blow its top.
For the first time, volcanologists have pieced together a map of which settlements are most at risk from lava and mudflows following an eruption. Some people could have less than an hour to get out before being overwhelmed.
Popocatépetl or "Popo" as the mountain is colloquially known, has been relatively quiet for the past 1200 years. That changed last December, when people in the nearby city of Amecameca became alarmed by unusual amounts of smoke and ash coming from the crater. With lava now welling up in the crater, geologist Michael Sheridan of the University of Buffalo in New York says there is a 30 per cent chance that there could soon be an eruption.
Sheridan joined a team of scientists from the National Autonomous University of Mexico (UNAM) in Mexico City to map the path molten rock would take if Popo does blow, as well as mudflows caused by glaciers melting in the heat of an eruption.
The team created a computer model based on data from mudflows and ash deposits of past volcanic eruptions. When they overlaid their results with a map of population density near Popo, they found nearly 100,000 people to be at risk from a major eruption (see Graphic).
Sheridan says he is particularly concerned about people living on the south side of the volcano. Many only speak the Aztec language Náhautl, making it harder for Spanish-speaking officials to organise an evacuation.
Using the map as a guide, officials at the National Centre for Disaster Prevention (Cenapred) in Mexico City are beginning to plan evacuation routes. They are monitoring the volcano so they can raise the alarm if it begins to bulge-a sign that an eruption is imminent.
Carlos Valdes of Cenapred says the computer model is helpful for forecasting which towns will be affected by eruptions of different sizes. Cenapred's interest is a positive step, says Claus Siebe at UNAM. "Normally civil authorities are rather reactive, there's not much prevention," he says. But the eruption of the Colombian volcano Nevado del Ruiz in 1985, which killed tens of thousands of people in the city of Armero, has concentrated the minds of many in Latin America. "We're remembering what happened in Armero," says Valdes. "We're looking very carefully."
Eugenie Samuel 
Boston
Popocatépetl volcano threatens area near Mexico City.

*
Earth's volcanism linked to meteorite impacts.
13 December 02
Large meteorite impacts may not just throw up huge dust clouds but also punch right through the Earth's crust, triggering gigantic volcanic eruptions.
The idea is controversial, but evidence is mounting that the Earth's geology has largely been driven by such events. This would also explain why our planet has so few impact crater remnants.
Counting the number of asteroids we see in the sky suggests that over the past 250 million years, Earth should have been hit around 440 times by asteroids larger than one kilometre across. But scientists have found only 38 large impact craters from this period.
Dallas Abbott from Columbia University and her colleague Ann Isley from the State University of New York studied the timing of these 38 impacts and found that they correlate strongly with eruptions of "mantle-plume" volcanoes during the same period.
Most volcanoes come from small amounts of the Earth's upper mantle boiling over, but mantle-plume volcanoes happen when hot rock from deep within the Earth's mantle shoots straight up through the Earth's crust. The timing suggests that these volcanoes are related to asteroid impacts, Abbott and Isley report in Earth and Planetary Science Letters (vol 205, p 53).
Unreliable dates 
Not everyone agrees. "I am not enthusiastic about the idea that impacts systematically control Earth's activity," says Boris Ivanov from the Institute of Geospheres Dynamics in Moscow. He has used computer models to investigate the effect of meteorites on the Earth's crust, and says he does not believe impacts are capable of having a significant effect on the planet's geological processes. 
And geochemist Christian Koeberl from Vienna University argues that the dates Abbott used are not reliable. "The impacts and volcanoes can only be correlated to within tens of millions of years," he says. "This doesn't really prove anything."
But elsewhere, there is growing support for the idea that Earth's volcanism may be closely entwined with meteorite impacts. 
Massive surge.
Adrian Jones and David Price from University College London say Abbott's work backs up their recent computer simulations. These models suggest meteorites bigger than about 10 kilometres across could sometimes punch right through the Earth's crust, causing huge volcanic eruptions (Earth and Planetary Science Letters, vol 202, p 551).
"A large impact has the ability to cause instant melting where it hits, creating its own impact plume in the mantle and resulting in a massive surge of lava spilling out," Jones explains.
Until now Abbott and Isley were not sure how impacts might trigger volcanic eruptions, but the UCL model suggests a mechanism. It would also explain why we do not see as many meteorite craters as we might expect, as the surges of molten rock would obliterate them.
Space rocks are blamed for violent eruptions (Image: GETTY)
Kate Ravilious

<#DIS>
*
The Pinatubo Eclipse 
By Bob Berman 
- December 1992 
A plethora of planets and moons may populate the universe, but only one reflects Earth's light back to our eyes. This unique talent belongs, not surprisingly, to our nearest neighbor--the moon. 
Perhaps you've already noticed an odd aspect of the crescent moon: the dark portion glows a bit, even though there's no sunlight there. It's Earthshine: sunlight bouncing off our shiny world to the moon's nightside and then back to us. Any citizen of the crescent moon's dark side would be dazzled by the gibbous Earth. 
But there's another, rarer occasion when our planet stands mirrored by the moon. It's coming up this month, when the moon plunges into Earth's shadow. 
It's the first total lunar eclipse in almost three years, and the first since the Mount Pinatubo eruption in the Philippines. For over a year, a pink afterglow has followed sunset--a reflection from the volcano's stratospheric dust and a vivid confirmation of the air's pollution. A decade ago, dust from the Mexican volcano El Chichón darkened Earth's atmosphere, resulting in the bizarre eclipse of 1982, when the moon assumed a weird yin-yang appearance. What effect will Pinatubo have on this month's eclipse? Nobody knows. But who would miss the chance to find out? We can see the whole picture of Pinatubo's pollution from a cosmic perspective as our atmosphere's status is broadcast by the darkened moon on December 9. 
That's because the moon rarely disappears when it falls into Earth's shadow. The eclipse's hour-long partial stages are usually followed by a total eclipse that is not black but coppery red. The ruddy tint materializes because Earth casts a red shadow in space. More precisely, our shadow is colored by atmospherically refracted sunlight. The most dramatic way to visualize the situation is to pretend you're a tourist on the moon during the eclipse. You'd see the sun slowly slipping and vanishing behind Earth. But then what a sight! The ink black cameo of Earth would be surrounded by a brilliant red ring--its atmosphere illuminated from behind by the sun. This crimson band is nothing less than all of Earth's sunrises and sunsets, forming a continuous halo around the ebony disk. 
But not perfectly continuous. Here and there clouds mar the ring; atmospheric dust and pollution darken other sections. The total light striking the moon depends on the clarity of Earth's air. 
The action begins at sunset. The full moon will come up already partially or totally eclipsed as seen from most of the United States and Canada. The eclipse will appear in its entirety just from the easternmost states, the moon rising perfectly full only to have the first black bite taken out of its bottom side soon afterward. Totality starts at 6:08 eastern time. 
Only the westernmost states and provinces miss the total phase; their consolation is the strange spectacle of a moon rising partially eclipsed. You'll see totality if your area's moonrise occurs before totality's end, at 7:22 eastern time. Of course, if the moon does blacken it may be hard to spot, a murky phantom in the eastern sky between the horns of Taurus. 
Should clouds spoil the show, just two more total lunar eclipses will be widely visible over the United States for the remainder of the century. The next occurs in only a year, on November 29, 1993. After that we wait until September 27, 1996. But neither is likely to offer the tantalizing suspense of this, the great Pinatubo eclipse. 

*
Jan 1994 v15 n1 p38(1). 
Title: The strangest volcano. (buried under Antarctic ice) (1993 - The Year in Science) Author: Robert Naeye 
THE WEST ANTARCTIC ICE SHEET SITS IN A BASIN BOUNDED BY THE TRANSANTARCTIC MOUNTAINS TO THE SOUTH AND MARIE BYRD LAND TO THE NORTH. THE BEDROCK IN THE BASIN IS BELOW SEA level, which has led researchers to worry that the ice sheet may one day collapse into the sea; if it did, the global sea level would rise about 20 feet, and coastal cities would be flooded. As it happens, the basin is also a rift valley--a place where Earth's crust is being stretched apart and hot rock from the mantle is rising to the surface. Last February a team of geophysicists announced that they had found an active volcano in the basin, under more than a mile of ice. The team was led by Donald Blankenship of the University of Texas and Robin Bell of Columbia's Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory. While flying over the ice sheets's western part, 300 miles east of where it meets the sea and forms the Ross Ice Shelf, they noticed a round depression, roughly 160 feet deep and four miles wide. They immediately suspected an active volcano: only it could melt such a large area of ice. And, as Bell says, "It's so hard to make things on Earth that are round that aren't volcanoes." Using radar to penetrate the ice, the researchers discovered a four-mile-wide, 2,100-foot-high conical mountain. When they measured the mountain's magnetic field, they saw the strong signal characteristic of iron-rich volcanic rock. Though this is the first volcano found lurking under the ice, the researchers don't think it's the only one. Further radar observations have shown that their volcano is sitting in the middle of a 14-mile-wide, shallow-rimmed caldera--a huge volcanic crater. And satellite images have revealed other circular depressions, at least one of which has a volcano's magnetic signature. "We're sure there are more out there," says Blankenship. What does the presence under the ice of volcanoes--and more generally, of hot curst--say about the future of the West Antarctic ice sheet? The answer isn't as obvious as you might think. The heat won't melt the whole ice sheet; there is too much ice and not enough heat. But toward the western edge of the ice sheet, in the region of the volcano, there is enough heat to melt the base of the ice. The meltwater mixes with the underlying sediment to form a 20-foot-thick glacial till. This goopy muck acts as a lubricant: it allows the ice to flow in streams tens of mile wide toward the Ross Sea, at speeds that reach 2,500 feet per year. The ice ends up in the ocean as icebergs. The ice streams themselves are not the danger: in fact, they are a kind of buffer that protects the main reservoir of ice from the sea. Nor does Blankenship believe that global warming is much of a threat to the West Antartic ice sheet. The danger, he says, is that the position of the ice streams might change; they might retreat inland, with the sea in pursuit--perhaps simply as a slow aftermath of the end of the last ice age. The streams cannot however, retreat past the region of hot crust that lubricates them; if things ever reached that point, the orderly streaming would stop. Exposed directly to the encroaching sea, the entire ice sheet might collapse. It has happened before, Blankenship points out: the ice sheet covering most of North America collapsed suddenly 20,000 years ago, filling the North Atlantic with an armada of icebergs. If it happened again in Antarctica, coastlines everywhere would feel the difference. 
*
June 1993 v14 n6 p12A(2). 
Title: El Chichon and the Maya. (Mexican volcano may have caused the end of the Mayan civilization) 
IN THE YEAR 1259 A HUGE VOLcanic blast spread a blanket of ash over the entire Earth, from the North Pole to the South. Ice cores drilled in Antarctica and in Greenland record the event--one of only two eruptions to show up in both ice caps--as a sharp peak in sulfuric acid. By comparing the intensity of the peaks at both poles, researchers have determined that the source of the explosion lay between the latitudes of 10 and 20 degrees north. But that's as close as they've come to locating the volcano. Now, however, volcanologist Haraldur Sigurdsson of the University of Rhode Island and glaciologist Julie Palais of the National Science Foundation think they've nearly nailed the culprit. It is either El Chichon, they say, or another Mexican volcano situated a few hundred miles away. While studying the deposits left by the 1982 eruption of El Chichon, which lies in southern Mexico on the isthmus leading to the Yucatan Peninsula, Sigurdsson unearthed evidence of two earlier, much larger eruptions. One eruption occurred around the year 900, the other around 1250. To see if the latter event was the 1259 explosion, Sigurdsson and Palais analyzed minute glass particles in its ash and compared them with glass particles in the ice core ash. (Every volcano has a distinctive ash chemistry.) El Chichon's ash was similar to the ice core ash--although not quite identical. "At this stage," Sigurdsson says, "it's not clear that El Chichon is responsible." Another possibility is Pico de Orizaba, located just 300 miles northeast of El Chichon: Sigurdsson recently unearthed evidence that it, too, underwent a large eruption around 1250. The researchers are now analyzing its ash to see if it matches ash from the ice cores. Even if neither Mexican volcano turns out to have been responsible for the ice core ash--which Sigurdsson considers unlikely--there is good reason to be interested in El Chichon's history. Around 900 the great civilization of the Maya, centered in southern Mexico and Guatemala, began its precipitous and mysterious decline. Sigurdsson has found Mayan artifacts buried by ash from El Chichon, and he speculates that the volcano may have contributed to the Maya's downfall. "In this part of the world," he says, "very large eruptions could seriously affect climate, bringing on drier conditions. The Yucatan is very sensitive to climate change, and so this, combined with a tremendous ash fall, could have had disastrous effects on agriculture." 
*
Jan 1994 v15 n1 p65(3). 
Title: Pinatubo lives. (volcano blamed for global temperature drop, ozone depletion) (1993 - The Year in Science) Author: Carl Zimmer 
SOMETHING STRANGE WAS IN TH AIR IN 1993. IN JANUARY THE AVERAGE WORLDWIDE LEVEL OF OZONE IN THE STRATOSPHERE WAS IN A RECORD-BREAKING SLUMP; IN THE SUMMER NORTHERN HEMISPHERE levels reached new regional lows; in September the notorious ozone hole over Antarctica returned, nearly twice as deep as ever before. And although carbon dioxide continued to accumulate in th atmosphere, aggravating the greenhouse effect, temperatures were actually cooler than normal in the summer, particularly in the interiors of continents--which may or may not have helped precipitate the Midwest's disastrous floods, depending on whom you talk to. What's going on here? Many researchers strongly suspect that the record ozone losss and the surprising coolness share a common cause: the eruption of Mount Pinatubo in the Philippines in June 1991. Mount Pinatubo was the largest eruption of the century, launching more than 30 trillion pounds of rock, dust liquid, and gas into the air. Its majestic plume disappeared in a matter of days, and the beautiful sunsets its dust created were gone in a matter of months. But Pinatubo also left behind 40 billion pounds of sulfur dioxide gas, which rose to the strastosphere immediately after the explosion. There it reacted with oxygen and water vapor to form a tenacious haze of sulfuric acid droplets. Although invisible to the naked eye, 30 percent of this mist was still hanging in the air this past fall. Volcanic clouds of sulfuric acid act as a planetary shade: they bounce sunlight back into space and thereby cool the planet. Just how much they cool it has been hard to determine; unless an eruption is truly titanic, its effect gets lost in the constant fluctuations of Earth's weather patterns. Pinatubo, however, had the necessary might. And that was a boon for climatologists, who were able to test their predictions of global warming by seeing how well the same climate models could predict the global cooling induced by the volcano. James Hansen and his colleagues at NASA's Goddard Institute for Space Studies in New York published their forecast six monts after the eruption. The sulfuric acid cloud was so big, they said, that the shadow it cast would do more than just block out any warming created by humans--it would caus a worldwide slide in temperature of about one degree by the winter of 1992. They said that 1993 would see a slow warming, and by the mid-nineties the man-made greenhouse effect would be back in full swing. With two years of real temperature readings to look at, Hansen has reason to be proud of his divination. The planet did indeed reach its coolest point late in 1992, and last year saw a gradual recovery. "It was a nice check on the climate's response," says Hansen. The model also accurately forecast that summers would be noticeably cool in the interior portions of the continents--and that's what happened in both 1992 and 1993, particularly in the American Midwest. The interior heats up quickly under the summer sun, being so far from the moderating influence of the oceans, and Hansen predicted that it would also cool down quickly under Pinatubo's veil. Could that cooling have had anything to do with the summer's tremendous Mississippi floods? "It's very plausible that you'd have a relation," says Hansen. The cooling may have helped create a succession of cold fronts that blocked the normal west-to-east movement of rainstorms last year, dumping all the rain in the Midwest and leaving the East with a drought. Hansen, however, doesn't trust his current model enough to speculate further. "It'll require a year or so before we can say to what degree Pinatubo was involved," he says. Pinatubo's effect on the ozone layer is equally hazy. Indeed, the relationship between volcanos and ozone in general is complicated. Among the main ozone destroyers, we've been told, are man-made chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) that are carried to the stratosphere. There the chlorine is released, and in the presence of ultraviolet sunlight it reacts with the three oxygen atoms that make up a molecule of ozone, breaking the bonds between the atoms and grabbing onto them so they can't reunite. yet CFCs aren't the only source of chlorine: Pinatubo released 4 billion pounds when it erupted. This fact has caused some people to decry the CFC-ozone line as a hoax: if it were true, they argue, volcanic eruptions should long ago have wiped out the ozone layr. The reason this hasn't happened, according to Azadeh Tabazadeh and Richard Turco, both atmospheric scientists at UCLA, is because volcanoes as a rule barely raise the level of chlorine in the stratosphere. Volcanoes, they explained in a paper published this past year, release chlorine in the form of hydrochloric acid--and hydrochloric acid, unlike CFCs, is soluble in water. The inside of the typical volcanic plume is filled with condensing drops of water. Tabazadeh and Turco constructed a chemical model showing that these drops quickly absorb the hydrochloric acid and fall to the ground. The part of the plume that reaches the stratosphere is thus scrubbed clean of chlorine. YET VOLCANOES ARE NOT Innocent bystanders in the ozone depletion plot. Though they may not be putting a significant amount of chlorine into the stratosphere, they may be helping to create conditions similar to those found over the South Pole, where man-made CFCs are most effective at destroying ozone. For reasons that are still not well understood, the reactions that liberate chlorine from the CFC molecules happen extremely quickly on the surfaces of ice crystals that form in polar stratospheric clouds. But in 1989 David Hofmann and Susan Solomon of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration showed that the same speedup of chlorine liberation that occurs on the ice cystals can theoretically occur too on the surface of sulfuric acid droplets--such as the ones that have been shading the planet since Pinatubo erupted. And while the ice crystals are largely confined to the poles, the sulfuric acid droplets can help set chlorine free at lower latitudes, destroying ozone and exposing much more populated regions of the Earth to higher levels of ultraviolet radiation. After Pinatubo's eruption, ozone concentrations in the stratospher did drop at an unusually fast clip. In the summer the United States experienced an ozone layer 10 percent thinner than normal, which translates into a 20 to 30 percent increase in the type of ultraviolet radiation that causes skin cancer. Over parts of Russia, ozone concentrations were 25 percent below normal. Solomon and Hofmann say satellite data show that the sulfuric acid reactions they predicted were indeed happening--but something else was happening, too. Because their scenario works best at cold temperatures, they thought it would occur mostly at the higher latitudes (although still far from the poles). Yet in 1993 ozone levels declined over most of the globe. "It's clear that chemistry is contributing to what's going on," says Solomon, but it may not be the only factor. It's also possible, she says, that Pinatubo is affecting ozone levels in some places by changing the circulation of the stratosphere. Ozone is produced primarily at lower latitudes, and normally it gets distributed around the planet on stratospheric winds: warm air rises in the tropics and flows toward the poles, cooling and sinking to the lower stratosphere as it goes. Though Pinatubo's haze reflects sunlight away from Earth, it also absorbs heat rising from its surface, warming the air around it in the stratosphere. Air that might normally sink as it cooled would stay at higher altitudes for longer periods of time, and the whole stratospheric circulation would slow down. As a result, less ozone would be carried to the middle and high latitudes. What looks like ozone destruction in those regions, then, could be in part just a distribution failure. "It's a little like waking up in the morning and the milk isn't thee," says Solomon. "Did somebody take the milk away? Or did the milkman fail to deliver the milk?" She and other researchers will be watching carefully as Pinatubo's veil continues to thin next year; the speed at which the ozone layer recovers will tell a lot about which theory of ozone loss is more correct, or how the two mechanisms might operate in concert. Though Pinatubo's effects will soon be gone, atmospheric researchers hope they aren't forgotten. Hansen believes that Pinatubo provided compelling evidence that predictions of global warming have to be taken seriously, since they're based on the same models that so accurately foretold Pinatubo's cooling effects. And as long as there are abnormal levels of man-made chlorine in the atmosphere--which will be for 50 years or more, given current international efforts to curb CFCs--volcanoes will continue to pose a threat to the ozone layer. "Pinatubo may have been the volcano of the century, but it was nothing like the volcano of the millennium," says Solomon. Tambora, an Indonesian volcano, erupted in 1815, releasing a plume roughly ten times the size of Pinatubo's. "If we're getting 10 or 15 percent ozone depletion over the Northern Hemisphere now, what would have happened if we'd had a Tambora? And there's no guarantee that we're not going to have Tambora tomorrow."
*
June 1993 v14 n6 p12(1). 
Title: El Chichon and the plankton. (volcano in Mexico inhibited algal bloom in the Arabian Sea) 
EACH MAY, EACH ORDINARY MAY, the Arabian Sea blooms. As the Indian landmass begins to heat up in the spring sun, as the hot air rising over the land draws the monsoon wind northward over the sea, as the monsoon pushes the surface water northward and away from the African shore, as the surface water is replaced by water welling up from the ocean bottom that is rich in nitrates and phosphates--that is, in fertilizer--as all this happens, the Arabian Sea grows green with single-celled algae, or phytoplankton. But not in 1982: the monsoon that year was puzzlingly weak, and the spring bloom was a dud. Alan Strong believes he knows why. He blames the April 1982 eruption of the volcano El Chichon, 12,000 miles away in Mexico--but at the same latitude as the Arabian Sea. Strong, an oceanographer at the U.S. Naval Academy, noticed that ocean temperature readings made in that latitude band by satellites in the spring of 1982 were consistently lower than the more accurate measurements made by ships and buoys. Month by month he mapped the discrepancy and found that it spread gradually from west to east--just like the cloud of sulfuric acid from El Chichon, which followed the prevailing winds. Strong concluded that the satellites were recording erroneously low temperatures because the volcanic cloud was blocking some of the heat that radiates up from the ocean. That same cloud, Strong argues, must have prevented some sunlight from reaching Earth. The loss would not have had much of an effect on the temperature of the ocean, with its enormous heat capacity, but it would have affected the land, which heats up and cools down much faster. That, after all, is why there is a monsoon in the first place, and that is why, according to Strong, the monsoon was weak in 1982: because El Chichon blocked sunlight, India didn't heat up enough. Without the monsoon, the phytoplankton in the Arabian Sea didn't get their pulse of fertilizer, and so their bloom was a fizzle. The loss of sunlight also had a direct effect on them because, being plants, they need sunlight to grow. The eruption in June 1991 of Mount Pinatubo in the Philippines (also at roughly the same latitude as the Arabian Sea) might have offered a test of Strong's hypothesis, but unfortunately there was no satellite in orbit at the time that was capable of recording phytoplankton levels. The next such satellite, called Seastar, is scheduled to be launched next year, however, and Strong is champing at the bit. "The next big eruption that comes along," he says, "we'll know much more what to expect." 
*
June 1994 v15 n6 p20(1). 
Title: Red (planet) river valleys. (geologic evidence of atypical water channels on Mars) 
MARS TODAY IS A FROZEN DESert, but the photos sent back by the Mariner and Viking probes in the 1970s indicate its past was less bleak and more Earth-like. The images showed sinuous channels and valleys that were almost certainly carved by flowing water. More than 3 billion years ago, researchers believe, Mars went through a warm epoch, as vigorously active volcanoes spewed greenhouse gases into its atmosphere. Water that had been locked up as permafrost earlier in the planet's history flooded over its surface, cutting the channels and perhaps even forming large lakes in some areas. But one network of valleys, the ones etched on the slopes of an extinct volcano called Alba Patera, doesn't fit this model. These valleys are much younger than the others. Judging from the small number of meteorite craters overprinted on the Alba Patera valleys, says planetary scientist Virginia Gulick of NASA's Ames Research Center, they were carved only about a billion years ago. By then, most of Mars' volcanoes had sputtered out, the planet had cooled, and all its water had once again become trapped in ice and permafrost. "The Alba Patera valleys formed at a time when we think Mars didn't have a warm, wet climate," says Gulick. "They formed well after that. The problem is how to explain them." Gulick and Christopher McKay, a NASA colleague, have come up with a unique explanation. A billion or so years ago, they speculate, a frozen lake covered the plains around Alba Patera, which was then still active. Since most of the other volcanoes had stopped spewing gases into the atmosphere, the temperature and atmospheric pressure on Mars were so low that ice from the lake surface sublimated--it transformed into vapor without first melting as water. The water vapor formed clouds that eventually dropped snow onto the volcano's slopes. The volcano's magma chamber then warmed the slopes enough to melt the bottom layers of the deep snowpack. So while the rest of the planet was already dry, the Alba Patera region was running its own little water cycle, according to Gulick and McKay, and small torrents of snowmelt were cutting valleys into the volcano's flanks. The pattern of the valleys supports this scenario, Gulick says. Whereas the far more massive melting of permafrost earlier in Martian history produced broad and comparatively straight channels, the valleys on Alba Patera form a complex network of tributaries much like the ones carved by spring snowmelt on our own mountainsides. Says Gulick: "They're the most Earth-like valleys we see on the planet." 
*
Jan 1994 v15 n1 p38(1). 
Title: The strangest volcano. (buried under Antarctic ice) (1993 - The Year in Science) 
THE WEST ANTARCTIC ICE SHEET SITS IN A BASIN BOUNDED BY THE TRANSANTARCTIC MOUNTAINS TO THE SOUTH AND MARIE BYRD LAND TO THE NORTH. THE BEDROCK IN THE BASIN IS BELOW SEA level, which has led researchers to worry that the ice sheet may one day collapse into the sea; if it did, the global sea level would rise about 20 feet, and coastal cities would be flooded. As it happens, the basin is also a rift valley--a place where Earth's crust is being stretched apart and hot rock from the mantle is rising to the surface. Last February a team of geophysicists announced that they had found an active volcano in the basin, under more than a mile of ice. The team was led by Donald Blankenship of the University of Texas and Robin Bell of Columbia's Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory. While flying over the ice sheets's western part, 300 miles east of where it meets the sea and forms the Ross Ice Shelf, they noticed a round depression, roughly 160 feet deep and four miles wide. They immediately suspected an active volcano: only it could melt such a large area of ice. And, as Bell says, "It's so hard to make things on Earth that are round that aren't volcanoes." Using radar to penetrate the ice, the researchers discovered a four-mile-wide, 2,100-foot-high conical mountain. When they measured the mountain's magnetic field, they saw the strong signal characteristic of iron-rich volcanic rock. Though this is the first volcano found lurking under the ice, the researchers don't think it's the only one. Further radar observations have shown that their volcano is sitting in the middle of a 14-mile-wide, shallow-rimmed caldera--a huge volcanic crater. And satellite images have revealed other circular depressions, at least one of which has a volcano's magnetic signature. "We're sure there are more out there," says Blankenship. What does the presence under the ice of volcanoes--and more generally, of hot curst--say about the future of the West Antarctic ice sheet? The answer isn't as obvious as you might think. The heat won't melt the whole ice sheet; there is too much ice and not enough heat. But toward the western edge of the ice sheet, in the region of the volcano, there is enough heat to melt the base of the ice. The meltwater mixes with the underlying sediment to form a 20-foot-thick glacial till. This goopy muck acts as a lubricant: it allows the ice to flow in streams tens of mile wide toward the Ross Sea, at speeds that reach 2,500 feet per year. The ice ends up in the ocean as icebergs. The ice streams themselves are not the danger: in fact, they are a kind of buffer that protects the main reservoir of ice from the sea. Nor does Blankenship believe that global warming is much of a threat to the West Antartic ice sheet. The danger, he says, is that the position of the ice streams might change; they might retreat inland, with the sea in pursuit--perhaps simply as a slow aftermath of the end of the last ice age. The streams cannot however, retreat past the region of hot crust that lubricates them; if things ever reached that point, the orderly streaming would stop. Exposed directly to the encroaching sea, the entire ice sheet might collapse. It has happened before, Blankenship points out: the ice sheet covering most of North America collapsed suddenly 20,000 years ago, filling the North Atlantic with an armada of icebergs. If it happened again in Antarctica, coastlines everywhere would feel the difference. 
*
Jan 1995 v16 n1 p102(1). 
Title: One small step. (multi-legged robots Dante and Dante II enter live volcano craters) 
Author: Carl Zimmer 
The spidery robot named Dante first tried to make history in January 1993 by descending into an Antarctic volcano, only to have its communication tether snap after 20 feet. Last August, Dante II erased most of that embarrassment: it successfully scrambled down into the crater on Mount Spurr, a volcano 80 miles west of Anchorage, Alaska. Granted, the robot had to be rescued on the return trip, when it tipped over 350 feet short of the crater rim. But a stumble on the homestretch was distinctly better than barely getting out of the starting block - especially given the challenging terrain. "On a difficulty scale of 0 to 10, we were prepared for a 10," says John Bares, a civil engineer who led the robot's $1.7 million redesign at Carnegie Mellon. "But once Dante got started, it was clear we were dealing with a 12." Steadied by a cable anchored on the crater rim, the ten-foot-long robot inched its way down the 30-degree incline, struggling to stay on top of the wet snow and muddy ash with the help of circular snowshoes. It also had to contend with boulders that had been shot up to the crater rim during Mount Spurr's last eruption, in 1993. Perched precariously in the muck, they often slipped and came crashing down past the robot - or onto it, in the case of one basketball-size rock. But Dante II soldiered on, its descent monitored via satellite by Bares and his colleagues, who were sitting in Anchorage. The distance was intentional - the robot's a rough prototype for one that might someday explore another planet. Dante II relayed video images back to Anchorage, along with a 3-D map it made by periodically scanning its surroundings with a laser. If the terrain was not too difficult, the robot would proceed autonomously in the direction it had been told to move; but when necessary the researchers could control it directly. Once on the crater floor, the robot analyzed gases escaping from the voilcanic vents, mostly to show that it could. The return trip proved more dangerous. Warm weather during Dante's weeklong stay in the crater melted six feet of snow, exposing three previously hidden boulders in its path. Unable to scale them, the robot backed away, stepped on some particularly soft ash, lost its balance, and fell over, as helpless as a bug on its back. When a helicopter tried to lift Dante out by its cable, the cable broke, tumbling the robot another ten yards downhill. Finally, Bares and an Army soldier walked down into the crater and wrestled the robot into the helicopter's sling. Says Bares, "Dante needs a few more versions before it's ready to be built for space." 
*
March 1995 v16 n3 p 26(1). 
Title: A giant's malaise. (earthquakes trigger in dormant California volcano) 
Author: Kathy A. Svitil 
On the morning of June 28, 1992 when a magnitude 7.3 earthquake hit the town of Landers, 100 miles east of Los Angeles, it did more than jolt southern Californians awake: it triggered thousands of smaller quakes, most less than magnitude 3, all over California, as well as in Nevada, Utah, and Idaho. Seismometers even picked up tremors in Yellowstone National Park, nearly 800 miles away. "The people at the U.S. Geological Survey in Menlo Park could see these things coming in, in real time, and they knew right away that something weird was going on," recalls Alan Linde, a geophysicist at the Carnegie Institution of Washington. "The idea of seismic triggering at a distance was a major surprise to all of us." In many places the seismic waves from Landers seemed to have given the push to faults that would have ruptured eventually anyway. But the hundreds of small quakes that occurred near the ski resort of Mammoth Lakes, 250 miles north of Landers in the Sierra Nevada, were different. Mammoth Lakes lies in a caldera - a giant volcanic crater - called Long Valley, and that caldera is underlain by a large chamber filled with molten rock. It was bubbles rising through that magma, say Linde and his colleagues, that set off the post-Landers tremors. Long Valley itself was formed 700,000 years ago in a catastrophic eruption that scattered ash all over the western United States. After that the volcano stayed quiet for the most part united 15 years ago, when it was shaken by a series of quakes much larger than the recent ones - a sign that it had received a fresh infusion of magma from below. Concerned about the potential for another eruption, researchers flocked to the site; among them were Linde and seismologist Roger Bilham of the University of Colorado. Now Long Valley is dotted with seismometers and other instruments. For four days after the Landers quake, those instruments detected seismic activity far in excess of the usual. A detailed analysis of the data, Linde and Bilham found, suggests that the seismic waves from Landers had raised the pressure in the magma chamber. It swelled in response, stressing the fractured rock above and setting off the flurry of quakes. "One might call it indigestion," Bilham jokes. But how could an earthquake 250 miles away cause that? At its source, tens of miles beneath the surface, Long Valley's magma contains quite a lot of gas in solution - carbon dioxide, for instance. As the magma rises, the pressure on it decreases, as does the amount of gas it can hold. By the time the magma reaches the chamber, four miles under Long Valley, much of the gas has come out of solution, forming bubbles. Some of those bubbles become trapped in fissures at the bottom of the magma chamber - united something jostles them loose. The seismic waves from Landers, says Linde, did just that: "They sloshed the whole magma body backward and forward a tiny bit, enough to change the geometry of the bubbles' connection to the rock. It's the beer-glass effect - you tap the side of the glass and the bubbles come up." As bubbles rise from the bottom of the magma chamber, the tend to expand because the amount of rock lying over them, and thus the pressure on them, decreases. But their expansion is resisted by the surrounding magma, which has nowhere to go. As a result, the pressure in the whole magma chamber rises - much as the pressure rises in a closed bottle of beer if you shake it. In the case of the magma chamber, though, the seal isn't perfect; there are cracks in the overlying crust. "It yields a little bit and moves the rock enough to have earthquakes," says Linde. As far as he and Bilham can tell, fortunately, the small tremors triggered at Long Valley by the Landers quake have no bearing on the danger that worries the residents of Mammoth Lakes: the danger of a catastrophic volcanic eruption. "The town of Mammoth Lakes is at the edge of a great blister that is growing at about an inch per year," says Bilham. "There is a fairly strong possibility it will erupt. If what happened 700,000 years ago happened today, there wouldn't be much left of Mammoth Lakes, and not much left of California. But there is no increased chance of that happening because of the quakes." 
*
Sept 1995 v16 n9 p31(1). 
Title: Paradises lost.(submarine volcano chain in Pacific was once an island chain)
A FEW YEARS BACK, OCEANOGRAphers studying satellite images of the South Pacific detected some unusual variations in the height of the sea surface along a swath of ocean several hundred miles southwest of Easter Island. The water in that area, they concluded, was being piled up by the gravitational pull of undersea volcanoes--an 850-mile-long chain that had escaped discovery until then. This past spring geologists on a German research vessel finally confirmed the existence of the chain, called the Foundation Seamounts. The researchers, led by volcanologist Colin Devey of the University of Kiel, spent two months cruising the length of the chain, collecting rock and sediment samples, taking photographs and videos, and making sonar maps of the 40-odd volcanoes. They concluded that the chain was formed by a hot spot--a plume of hot rock rising from deep in the mantle. The hot spot is located just west of the East Pacific Rise, a boundary where two of Earth's crustal plates are spreading apart and new seafloor is forming between them. "That seafloor is then drifting over the hot spot, going westward toward Japan," explains Devey. "So the farther west you go along the chain, the older the volcanoes are. The youngest volcanoes are in the east." The Hawaiian chain formed in the same way; the hot spot there is also at the eastern end of the chain, feeding the active volcanoes on the island of Hawaii. As volcanoes move off a hot spot and go extinct, they stop building their peaks higher with fresh lava. And as the seafloor that carries them moves away from the East Pacific Rise, it cools and sinks. The Foundation Seamounts, the oldest of which dates back roughly 20 million years, are now all submerged under at least 1,300 feet of water. But that wasn't always the case. On several of the shallower seamounts, the researchers found white coral sand and evidence of extensive erosion--the volcanic peaks had been flattened into broad plateaus. "You can only do that at the sea surface, where waves are breaking," says Devey. "So in fact the Foundation chain was a chain of islands in days gone by." Might a new paradise emerge from the waves one day at the eastern end of the chain? Devey doesn't think so. None of the younger volcanoes in the Foundation chain show any evidence of ever having been at the surface, which suggests that the magma plume is sputtering. "In the past the hot spot built big islands," says Devey. "But now there's not enough magma to get them out of the water."
*
March 1999 v20 i3 p108(1). 
Title: IN SEARCH OF THE ELUSIVE MEGAPLUME.(an underwater phenomenon caused by volcanoes)(includes related article on the sea floor)
 Author: JOSH FISCHMAN
Imagine volcanoes that erupt with giant twisting plumes filled with microbes and other life that spin like a discus for months. Welcome to the strange, almost completely unknown life of undersea eruptions A little more than a year ago, on the night of February 9, the 170-foot research ship Wecoma headed west from the Oregon coast into darkening rough seas. Within hours, the ship was trying to make its way into a gale that drove rain horizontally across the deck. By the next day 45-knot winds were jacking waves up to heights of 30 feet, conditions that could easily have smashed smaller vessels. The relentless pounding continued for days. Oceanographer Ed Baker remembers February 14 as the worst night of all. Waves crashed and roared over the deck, blurring sky and sea. Then the wind would suddenly change direction without warning, propelling rollers into the ship from an entirely new angle. The Wecoma pitched and bucked violently in unpredictable jerks. "What you can't appreciate until you're out there is the whipping motion," says Baker. "If you're not holding on, you can get thrown across the deck." Despite the storm, Baker, a researcher at the Pacific Marine Environmental Laboratory in Seattle, and his colleagues were determined to launch a half-ton deepwater probe into the Pacific from the roller-coaster decks. They knew that a mile below the Wecoma a volcano had blown its top, and only the most unholy of storms would keep them from collecting evidence of a newly discovered side effect of such an eruption: giant underwater twisters of hot water, called megaplumes, loaded with minerals and strange life-forms. As the deck crane cavorted wildly in the wind, the researchers gingerly lowered the probe--a cluster of sampling bottles held by a wire tether--over the side. Once the probe was in the water, they let the tether unspool for 40 minutes until the bottles were a mile underwater. They worried the whole time that the corkscrewing motion of the ship would snap the wire. Then they had to haul the load back aboard. "Swinging is a bad thing," Baker says, remembering the gyrations of the crane. If the bottles slammed against the hull, they would be destroyed. If they slammed against scientists and deckhands, someone would die. Conditions deteriorated and the captain of the ship banished the scientists inside, where they passed hours trying to drink coffee that frequently flew out of their cups or trying to rest in tossing bunks that thrust them to the floor. Sleeping, Baker says, "was always an adventure." The night of the fourteenth was memorable not only because the seas were so rough but also because the researchers had to deploy an acoustic beacon the size of a telephone pole. In the dim glow of deck lights, the crew struggled on the Wecoma's fantail. The hook of the crane crashed into the device. Although they didn't know whether the beacon had been damaged, they set out a chain of fragile glass globes that would later bring the device back to the surface. Then they raised the 30-foot-long aluminum shaft. "It's very heavy, yet very delicate as well," Baker says. As the ship roared up the face of one wave and plunged down the other side, the beacon began swinging back and forth. The crew grappled with the heavy lines. One deckhand lost his grip but then grabbed on again before the shaft could crash into anyone. Finally the crane lowered the instrument into the water. Baker remembers, "It went off without a hitch, but that was probably the scariest part of the trip." Several days later, everyone was relieved when the beacon began broadcasting data. The voyage to the volcano and back took ten days, "probably the worst weather for ten days straight that I'd ever had at sea," Baker says. But when the Wecoma docked in Oregon, he was a happy man, and not just because he was standing on terra firma. The data he and his colleagues had collected painted a picture of a far more violent spectacle on the seafloor than the scientists had experienced in the storm on the surface. The first rumblings of that unseen spectacle had begun weeks earlier, on January 25. A network of sensitive hydrophones in the North Pacific, deployed by the U.S. Navy to listen for Soviet submarines, picked up a swarm of earthquakes at the summit of an undersea volcano called Axial. The quakes were a lot less subtle than the quiet hunters of the cold war: they sounded like freight trains rumbling by. Over the course of a day the quakes traveled 30 miles from the volcano, following a scar in the seafloor where two plates of the planet's crust are pulling apart. The quakes shook loose the rock that had stopped up the volcano's plumbing. Through the newly cleared rocky pipes came an inferno of molten rock and boiling water driven upward by the intense pressures and temperatures of the inner Earth miles below. "It would have been pretty spectacular if you'd been down there in the early going and seen, really, a boiling cauldron of water popping up out of the seafloor," Baker says. A typical volcano on land, such as Mount St. Helens, fills the sky with a plume of ash when it erupts. But Axial belched forth an equally massive eruption of superhot water. That was followed by streams of lava, some as deep as six feet, flowing down the sides of the volcano. Along Axial's flanks, fields of geysers suddenly pierced the ocean bottom, shooting up superheated jets of water darkened with heavy concentrations of minerals from Earth's crust. "We estimated, roughly, that there were ten gigawatts of energy coming out of the volcano's caldera," Baker says. "By comparison, Bonneville Dam on the Columbia River puts out about one gigawatt, and that can provide energy for 3 million homes." The trip on the Wecoma was launched to find out what happens when all that energy breaks loose. In the last few decades, geophysicists have sketched the broad outlines of plate tectonics--how Earth's molten mantle of lava rises up to the surface and turns into plates of rigid crust--but many mysteries remain. Answers are not easy to come by because they must be found at places like Axial, obscured by deep ocean. But in recent years researchers have learned how to place sensors on or near volcanoes like Axial. The instruments dropped by Baker and his fellow oceanographers, for example, measured water temperature, current flow, and the chemicals released during the eruption. Baker was particularly interested in learning more about megaplumes, observed only seven times before. Hot geysers of water, such as those on Axial's flanks, rise only a few hundred feet above the seafloor, then diffuse like a pall of low-hanging smoke. Megaplumes, however, can soar more than several thousand feet off the ocean floor and spin like slow but gargantuan tornadoes. They can be 12 miles across and travel hundreds of miles. "It's a bomblike event," says Baker, who was among a group of oceanographers who discovered the phenomenon in 1986. Shortly thereafter, the researchers dubbed the underwater cyclones megaplumes. The plumes have attracted interest for three reasons. First, they're new. "You don't often get a chance to find something that's not known to exist," Baker says. "And this isn't some tiny feature, like a little rock This is a whole giant process that no one knew about." Second, megaplumes stir up huge amounts of ocean, carrying minerals and gases and heat almost to the sea's surface. Vertical mixing doesn't happen easily in the ocean. Cool, dense water tends to stay near the bottom and warmer buoyant water near the top. As they rise from the ocean's depths, megaplumes may bring energy and food to animals in shallow water. "They could be doing things to the energy of the ocean that we don't even know about," says David Butterfield, a chemist at the marine environmental lab. Third, megaplumes move great distances horizontally too. In their travels, they may have helped some of the oddest and oldest beasts in the world colonize the planet. A hydrothermal hellhole like Axial may seem like a poor choice for a home, but it supports vibrant communities. Bacteria that feed on methane and other noxious chemicals provide sustenance for three-foot-long hollow tube worms and tiny dams. These critters can live only in hot spots on the seafloor, yet they have been found all over the world. How do they cross vast nutrient-free expanses of the sea to find new places to live? Megaplumes, which remain intact, spinning and drifting for months and traveling hundreds of miles, could be mobile ecosystems. "Maybe they're like express buses," Baker says. If so, the bus depot is a mid-ocean ridge such as the Juan de Fuca, which runs right below Axial. The ridge's hot material rises from deep inside Earth, cools at the top, then slides off on both sides to become yet more planetary crust. At various hot spots, the ridge crosses over vertical channels that rise from the mantle. Molten rock rises to within a mile of the surface of the seafloor and forms a magma chamber. There it lies, slowly bubbling away. Above the chamber are the relics of past intrusions of the magma to the seafloor's surface. Directly overhead is a layer of hardened vertical lava pipes--imagine a batch of pencils clutched together--known as dikes. On top of the dikes lies cooled, fractured lava called pillow basalt, rife with cracks and voids through which seawater circulates. This loose collection of rock and water is what we generally think of as the solid seafloor. It's hardly a stable situation. A hiccup from within the planet can drive more magma into the chamber, making it swell and send tremors through the rocks above. The pipe-shaped dikes can shift, suddenly making room for a new column of magma to force its way up through the pencil cluster. The new column of lava is hot--about 2200 degrees. The heat expands the water, percolating it through the loose layer above and shooting it through a seafloor laced with sulfur, methane, iron, and other chemicals. The geysers through which this water emerges are known as hydrothermal vents. At particular hot spots, the magma breaches the surface repeatedly, forming a cone. Much as it does on land, the cone cools and turns solid, then a new lava flow breaks out from it, running down the flanks and beginning the process of making an undersea mountain. The process, repeated over thousands of years, creates volcanoes such as 5,000-foot-high Axial. The Juan de Fuca Ridge has garnered a lot of scientific interest because it runs roughly parallel to the northwest coast of the United States only 300 miles offshore, making it relatively easy to get to. Axial lies on top of a segment midway along the ridge. In 1986 a research vessel carrying Ed Baker and his colleagues lay above a southern segment called Cleft. "We wanted to map the ridge to see where vent fields were likely to be," Baker says, riffling through the multicolored maps of the seafloor that clutter the desk in his Seattle office. A dark-haired man of medium build, Baker speaks deliberately, but his voice picks up speed as he tries to make a point. "We were doing something called a towyo, where you tow instruments behind the ship and send them up and down at the same time, in a sawtooth pattern. This lets you sample the water at different depths. All of a sudden, we started getting a bunch of plumelike signals up here"--the oceanographer raises his hands, indicating a point high above the seafloor--"in an area where there shouldn't have been any plumes. "We were using an instrument that measures the optical clarity of the water. It's very simple, really. It shines a light from point A to point B. And if there is less light at the end, it's because there are particles in the water. All of a sudden it started going up and up and up when it should have been zero, zero, zero! "At first we thought, `Well, what's wrong with the instruments?' It took us a while to realize there wasn't a problem. There were just plumes where there weren't supposed to be plumes. Instead of plumes rising 200 meters above the seafloor, we had plumes 1,000 meters above it. "We spent about four days towing around the area, and we started drawing a picture of this great big circle," Baker continues. "We'd start moving through the circle and the readings would get higher and higher, then we'd get to the middle and move out the other side and the readings would drop off again." So Baker began to visit other eruption sites at various segments of the Juan de Fuca Ridge and saw megaplumes at all of them. "The plumes are pretty distinctive," he says. "They've got a definite top and bottom. Their temperature and salt content are different from the surrounding water. They're warmer, and they're more fresh. In part that explains why they rise so high: hot fluids are more buoyant than cooler ones." Eventually the megaplume cools down just enough to stop rising. At that point it is about 2 degrees warmer than the water at the seafloor and three-tenths of a degree warmer than the water surrounding the plume. That difference may not seem like much, but water has tremendous heat capacity. Raising water temperature by 1 degree requires 4,000 times more heat than raising the temperature of an equal volume of air. Heat is a reason megaplumes maintain their shape. Heat causes water molecules to spread apart, making them much less dense than the surrounding water. Because fluids of different densities don't like to mix, the megaplume hangs together. Another reason megaplumes live so long is that they spin. In 1996, at a segment known as the Gorda Ridge, Baker's team spotted two megaplumes and dropped a sensor into one of them. Three months later the sensor popped back up to the surface and sent a description of its journey to a satellite. It had spun clockwise around the edge of the plume and then gradually moved toward the middle, as if caught in a giant eddy. Baker describes the plumes as similar to underwater hurricanes. Their shape and movement result from a devilishly complex interaction between the rising plume and the side ways rotation of the planet. Moving up or down while going sideways produces a twist known as the Coriolis effect. It's the reason bathtubs drain in a spiral, hurricanes rotate in a spiral, and megaplumes spin round and round. The megaplume Baker tracked was spinning at about 6.5 feet a minute, taking eight days to make a full rotation. (Some megaplumes can spin three times faster.) Viewed from the side, he says, a megaplume might initially look like a huge twirling mushroom, with a disklike top that tapers down to a long tail. Eventually the tail disappears and the megaplume takes on the form of a giant Frisbee. On his most recent voyages, Baker has been trying to figure out how megaplumes form (see page 115) and where they go. He wonders whether megaplumes carry the gases of an eruption, such as carbon dioxide and methane and helium 3, as well as minerals such as sulfur and iron, to upper layers of the ocean where most plant and animal life resides. Plankton, for example, thrive on iron. An infusion of iron makes plankton bloom, starting a vast domino effect on the sea surface that alters food chains and possibly the atmosphere as greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide are absorbed. To find out the answers to these questions, Baker's colleague Bob Embley is laying the groundwork for a long-term observatory at Axial that will be put in place early in the next century. He envisions a network of sensors and cameras on the seafloor, transmitting data to buoys near the surface, which in turn bounce the signals off satellites to Baker's office in Seattle. This New Millennium Observatory (NeMO, for short) will also employ an autonomous submarine at a permanent mooring on the site so that a scientist, after hearing the rumbles of an upcoming eruption, can tell it to "please do survey number 5." Then, Baker says, with the memory often horrible days at sea still fresh in his mind, "I could dial up the results on the Web from the comfort of my home." 
RELATED ARTICLE: Is the Seafloor Like a Hot Plate? How does a megaplume get started? What prompts such a massive explosion of hot water in such a short time? No one knows for certain, but two competing views have gained ground. One sees the seafloor as a suddenly squeezed sponge; the other sees it as a large hot plate heating the water above. Ed Baker believes in the sponge theory. Megaplumes are squeezed out by the deep crust because plume water contains helium 3, an isotope that's rare at the surface but more common in deep Earth. So he and others envision a magma dike shooting up from below, squeezing a massive amount of fluid out the top of the loose seafloor. "Water would come erupting out everywhere," he says. Yet Baker also realizes this theory has a problem: nature abhors a vacuum. "For every gallon of water leaving the crust, there's got to be a gallon of water entering the crust. Water won't get out unless something comes in to fill the vacuum. How does that happen?" CRACKING THE SEAL William Wilcox, a researcher at the University of Washington, has an answer: forget the vacuum. Wilcox notes that the fluid and gases such as helium and methane percolating through the seafloor are already under great pressure. An intruding magma dike might crack the seal at the top, like loosening the valve on a pressure cooker. Reduce the pressure and the watergas mixture will expand, vastly increasing its volume. There would be enough to fill all the voids and cracks in the seafloor, eliminating any vacuum problem, while the excess would come boiling out to form a megaplume. But when Pacific Marine Environmental Laboratory chemist David Butterfield looks at the fluid inside a megaplume, he sees something that doesn't jibe with the sponge theory. "The chemistry of megaplumes and regular plumes is really different," he says. "So it doesn't look as if they are coming from exactly the same place." What stops Butterfield is the ratio of manganese to iron in megaplumes. Manganese leaches from seafloor rocks much more slowly than iron does. Because normal plume water spends a lot of time circulating through the loosely packed seafloor, it has time to pick up extra manganese, and the iron has time to settle out. Typically, this produces water with an iron-to-manganese ratio of 4 to 1. But in a megaplume, the ratio is closer to 10 to 1. The disparity led Butterfield to wonder whether the megaplume water wasn't spending sufficient time within the seafloor but was instead rushing by it too quickly to pick up enough manganese. Butterfield began envisioning megaplumes formed by the geologic hot-plate theory. "Now, I'm a chemist, not a modeler," he cautions, but it's not hard to imagine a magma dike breaching the seafloor and laying out 1200-degree lava over half a square mile. That would expose a lot of seawater to heat, but only once. The water would be warmed as it passed over the molten rock, like a pot of water on a hot plate, and start to rise before it had enough time to pick up manganese. Baker doesn't buy it. "I'm not convinced you can get the heat out fast enough that way," he says. "These guys envision the megaplumes forming in a week or so. I think they happen in a much shorter time, days or hours." And the hot plate doesn't have enough heat to do it. The voyage to Axial last February was supposed to test both theories. If researchers found a megaplume but no detectable large flows of lava, Baker could toss out the hot-plate idea permanently. So he set out sensors designed to track water flow along the ocean floor, changes in temperature, and the movement of the crust. The sensors were supposed to record the data, then bob up to the surface where they could be gathered. RETURN TO AXIAL On the return visit to Axial to retrieve the data during a calmer August, however, the researchers found few clues, and the debate still rages. The instruments on the sides of Axial that measured current could have supported the squeezed-sponge model if they had measured a strong flow of water back toward the volcano to replace the expelled fluids. But one instrument couldn't be found at all, and another was buried under a fresh layer of lava. These frustrations are typical for underwater research. "You know, it's not like being a chemist in a lab where you can say, `Okay, I want to do this kind of experiment to prove my theory.' We're sort of at the mercy of Mother Nature here," Baker says. "And it's not like being a geologist on land. We can't necessarily get to where we want to go when we want to get there. So it takes longer to figure these things out than you might expect."--J. F. 
*
Jan 1997 v18 n1 p20(1). 
Title: You call that an eruption? (Mount Ruapehu volcano eruption, New Zealand) (The Top 100 Science Stories of 1996)(News from the Pacific) 
Author: Kathy A. New zealand sits at the margin of the Pacific and Australian plates, and their collision makes volcanic activity commonplace. Even so, the eruption this past summer of Mount Ruapehu, on the country's North Island, was the most spectacular in more than a century. On June 17 the volcano began hurling clouds of ash and billowing smoke 20,000 feet into the atmosphere; chunks of molten rock, some of them reportedly the size of cars, flew hundreds of feet. At one time or another the ash clouds closed 11 airports, and ash that washed into the water intake of one major hydroelectric plant caused $6.5 million in damage. The North Island's two largest ski resorts, located on the flanks of Ruapehu, were also closed - right at the beginning of New Zealand's ski season. Although the skiers stayed home, amateur volcano watchers came from around the globe. "Ruapehu has had a very large impact because it was so well covered by the media, with images ages going out around the world," says volcanologist Bruce Houghton of New Zealand's Institute of Geological and Nuclear Sciences. "But on a global scale the eruption was tiny - perhaps one one-hundredth the size of Pinatubo. We didn't have a single foreign volcanologist visit." 
*
Title: Vulcan's Fury: Man Against the Volcano.(Review)_(book reviews) 
Author: Robert Kunzig 
Vulcan's Fury: Man Against the Volcano Alwyn Scarth. YALE UNIVERSITY PRESS, 1999, $29.95. 
There are many ways to be murdered by a volcano, as Alwyn Scarth makes vividly clear, and most don't involve lava. Lava flows slowly enough for a human to outrun. After ash and pumice from Vesuvius fell on Pompeii like hot snow and accumulated in 8-foot-high drifts, the people who lingered in town were stopped in their tracks and asphyxiated, at 7:30 a.m. on August 25 in A.D. 79, by a nuee ardente: an incandescent ash cloud that surged at hundreds of miles per hour through their streets and flattened their houses. Krakatau launched clouds like that too, in 1883, but it was the tsunamis--100-foot-high waves triggered by the collapsing island--that swept away most of the 36,000 victims on the shores of Java and Sumatra. Nevado del Ruiz, on the other hand, killed with waves of mud, which roared down narrow river valleys after the volcano melted part of its ice cap. On November 13, 1985, as the volcano twitched and ash started to fall, the inhabitants of Armero, Colombia, were urged by their mayor and their priest to keep calm, stay home, and watch the soccer game. The crush of mud and boulders left a death count of 23,000. In his gripping and richly illustrated book, Scarth, formerly a geographer at the University of Dundee, describes those eruptions and a dozen others in blow-by-blow detail, one eruption per chapter. He focuses not on geologic causes, but on the effects of volcanoes and how people responded to them. When huge amounts of lava fountained from the fissures at Laki in Iceland during the summer of 1783, no one was killed initially But over the next two years, volcanic fluorine poisoned the cattle, causing their bones to go soft and their teeth to fall out, while ash and acid rain poisoned fields and pastures. Nearly 10,000 Icelanders--one-fifth of the population--starved to death. [Graphic omitted]The highlight of the book is Scarth's collection of eyewitness reports. Thy most famous one comes from Pliny the Younger, who had a very narrow escape in A.D. 79. His uncle, Pliny the Elder, commander of the Roman fleet, had just steered his galleys to a beach to miles from Vesuvius in a futile attempt to rescue stranded people. There an ash cloud killed him. It had petered out a bit, fortunately; by the time it reached younger Pliny: I turned round and saw the thick black cloud advancing over the land behind us like a flood.... We had hardly sat down to rest when the darkness fell upon us. But it was not the darkness of a moonless, or cloudy, night, but just as if all the lamps had been put out in a completely closed room. We could hear women shrieking, children crying, and men shouting. Some were calling for their parents, for their children, or for their wives, and trying to recognize them by their voices.... Many begged for the help of the gods, but even more imagined that there were no gods left and that the last eternal night had fallen on the world. In the end, the sun came out, the centuries went by, and people built new settlements on the flanks of Vesuvius, on top of Roman ruins that--with the famous exceptions of Pompeii and Herculaneum--were never excavated. Though the volcano has not erupted since 1944, it is far from extinct, Scarth warns. Perhaps, thanks to the modern science of volcano monitoring, the galleys will arrive in time before the next cataclysm--or perhaps not. Even as it leaves readers with that troubling thought, Scarth's book manages to be strangely entertaining.
*
Nov 1999 v20 i11 p82. 
Title: UNDER THE VOLCANO.(the danger of living near Mt. Ranier) 
Author: JACK McCLINTOCK 
Look out Tacoma and Seattle. Majestic Mount Rainier is overdue for a shattering and deadly eruption On a sunny Saturday afternoon in June, John Anderson, a 43-year-old sawmill worker, sits in front of his pretty green-trimmed house in a family-friendly subdivision in Orting, Washington, not far from Seattle. He gazes contentedly down the street, scratching his neat goatee and watching the neighborhood kids shoot hoops in a driveway It's an ordinary day in suburban America, but here in Orting, behind every house, mostly ignored, is 14,410-foot-high, snowcapped Mount Rainier. This is one of the continent's most spectacular sights: a mountain that seems to loom and then recede, sometimes crisply focused and near enough to touch, at other times shifting into the fog, vanishing, then reappearing. "When we get a full moon and it comes up over the mountain, it's really something," says Anderson, leading a visitor into the backyard for a better view. Anderson takes Rainier for granted. The mountain views came with the house, which cost $120,000 three years ago. In most places, such views would only add to the value of real estate over time, but Anderson's house hasn't appreciated a dime since he bought it. That's because Mount Rainier, the highest point in the Cascades, is not just lovely scenery It's the most dangerous volcano in the United States. When it erupts--and it will--blistering avalanches of incandescent rock, lava, and ash will sweep down the volcano. Worse, unimaginably large flows of mud hundreds of feet deep, called lahars, filled with melted ice, boulders, and whole forests of uprooted trees, will pour down adjacent river valleys at upward of 25 miles an hour. Like concrete cascading down the chute of a cement truck, the lahars will entomb everything in their path. And that path runs right over Anderson's house. Rainier is one of a score of volcanoes in the Cascades, from Northern California to British Columbia. Seven Cascades volcanoes have erupted in the past 200 years. All are smoking guns. "They say it's not if, it's when," Anderson says. The only question is how many people will die. As the U.S. population has doubled since 1943, whole towns have been built closer and closer to many of the 68 potentially active volcanoes that bubble away in Western states, Alaska, and Hawaii. Millions of people live in Seattle and Tacoma. Between the two cities and Mount Rainier, at least 100,000 people live on the solidified mudflows of previous eruptions. Orting, population 3,600, is one of the towns built on ground that is itself clear warning of danger. Known for logging and growing hops, Orting has a main street with a Timber Tavern and Frontier Bank on one side, a tree-shaded plaza on the other, and a postcard-perfect view of Mount Rainier at the foot. Inexpensive real estate has encouraged construction of at least three new housing developments like the one Anderson lives in. "And there's a new elementary school going up," he says. [Graphic omitted]To a layperson's eye, Mount Rainier looks unchanged from the way it appeared two centuries ago when a member of Captain George Vancouver's exploratory crew first sketched it--serene, stately, a symbol of permanence. Here, looks are deceiving. Rainier sits along the boundary of tectonic plates forming Earth's crust. Off the coast of Seattle in the Pacific Northwest, a heavy chunk of seafloor called the Juan de Fuca plate has been ramming itself under the lighter North American plate at the rate of an inch and a half a year, about a third as fast as hair grows. Squeezed and heated, the rock melts into magma, blobs of which rise toward the surface into chambers where it becomes trapped, cooking and rolling like boiling oatmeal. When the pressure becomes too great, it bursts free, throwing out lava, gas, steam, ash, and hot rocks. Rainier is a series of successive lava flows broken up by centuries of ice, water, percolating volcanic gases, and the mountain's own internal heat. When scientists look inside Rainier, they find some of its rock crumbly and weak. The mountain is dangerously unstable, a tall, steep heap of loose rocks held together by the force of gravity and a cubic mile of glacier ice that could be melted or shaken loose. Of course, volcanoes unpredictably express themselves in several ways: Rainier could blow, or flow, or both. One danger is a ground-hugging avalanche of incandescent rock (as hot as 1,300 degrees Fahrenheit), ash, and gas racing downhill at 80 miles an hour. In 1902, on the Caribbean island of Martinique, Mount Pelee erupted and sent just such a pyroclastic flow sweeping into the town of St. Pierre, killing 29,000 people. Only two residents survived; one of them, Auguste Ciparis, had been serving time in a windowless dungeon. Less frequent is the classic, melodramatic eruption that occurs when pressures that have built up within a chamber of viscous, gassy magma suddenly burst free, throwing out tons of gas, ash, and superheated volcanic rock. Such explosive volcanoes are typically tall and steep and poetically evocative, and often, like Etna, Vesuvius, and Fuji, loom large in history and literature. Mount St. Helens was one, and so was Mount Pinatubo in the Philippines, which in 1991 spewed 15 million tons of ash, rock, and sulfuric acid 22 miles into the stratosphere. Within three weeks, the debris had veiled the globe, reflecting sunlight back into space and chilling that year's winter by at least a full degree. If all the volcanic material had fallen on Manhattan, it would have buried the island 1,000 feet deep, leaving only the tips of a few skyscrapers poking out. Luckily, an efficient warning system saved thousands of lives. Even so, 350 people died. When Rainier gets ready to explode, it will announce itself with the same earthquakes, increased gas emissions, and swelling of the mountain that helped scientists warn citizens living near Pinatubo, says Willie Scott, the scientist in charge of the Cascades Volcano Observatory in Vancouver, Washington. Volcanic ash would most likely head east, downwind and away from populous areas. Lava or pyroclastic flow would be unlikely to reach far beyond the boundaries of Mount Rainier National Park. Less gaudy, far more likely, and far more dangerous to population centers, Scott says, is a lahar--a volcanic mudflow that starts a mud slide. Almost anything could trigger one with little advance warning: an earthquake, a steam explosion, the heat of rising magma, the collapse of a weakened flank of the mountain, or gravity. A small eruption or pyroclastic flow could do it, too, as it did in Armero, Colombia, in 1985. The town had been built, like Orting, on a solidified mudflow from a previous eruption. When snowcapped Nevado del Ruiz emitted a burp of lava and hot rock one day, a river of slurry a fifth the size of the Amazon River roared through town and buried 23,000 people. [Graphic omitted]Something like that happened about 5,600 years ago near what is now Orting, when a lahar hundreds of feet deep roared off Rainier and spread over 100 square miles, filling the White and Puyallup River valleys with 60 feet of sludge. Giant lahars have reached all the way to the Puget Sound lowlands every 500 years on average. Scientists figure there's one chance in seven of its happening again in the lifetime of anyone who lives in the vicinity. That's why they worry about the Andersons and their 100,000 neighbors in the lowlands around Rainier. The next Rainier lahar could shoot straight through Orting, Sumner, Puyallup, and possibly Tacoma to the sound. The nearest towns will be gone in less than an hour. "You'd only get 10 or 15 minutes' warning," says a Mount Rainier park ranger, "and then it's every man for himself." [Graphic omitted]A volcanic eruption can't be prevented. But before it erupts, a volcano may rumble for weeks or months as hot magma rises, bulging measurably and producing a symphony of gas seepage, steam blasts, and small events called earthquake swarms. Monitoring such signs saved lives at Pinatubo. Nearly a million people lived nearby, including 20,000 U.S. military personnel. Scientists from the Philippine Institute of Volcanology and Seismicity noticed right away when Pinatubo awoke with steam blasts in early-April 1991. A team of specialists from the U.S. Geological Survey worked with the Philippine scientists to set up a network of instruments around the mountain; they studied its eruptive history and concluded that a huge eruption was imminent. They were right. When Pinatubo exploded on June 15, in Earth's largest eruption in 75 years, it filled previously inhabited valleys with 600 feet of ash. Most people had been evacuated, not to mention at least $250 million worth of military equipment. At a cost of $1.5 million, the monitoring seemed quite a bargain. [Graphic omitted][Graphic omitted]Still, predicting volcanic eruptions remains an iffy science. The Mount St. Helens disaster in Washington in 1980 taught volcanologists a humbling lesson. They knew it was about to blow. But the timing surprised them, and the blast was three times more powerful than they expected. A wiry 30-year-old geologist named David Johnston was monitoring the mountain from a U.S. Geological Survey instrument truck parked on a ridge that now bears his name. "Vancouver, Vancouver, this is it!" he shouted into his radio seconds before a blast that tore trees into tiny shreds and killed Johnston. His body was never found. [Graphic omitted]Mount St. Helens killed 56 other people, too, and led to a heightened sense of urgency at Geological Survey monitoring stations in Hawaii, Alaska, and Long Valley, California, as well as the Cascades. Geologists mapped rock deposits from previous eruptions, dated them to determine frequency of deposit, and identified spots likely to be hit again. Scientists analyzed the chemistry and temperature of gas emissions from hot springs and gas vents called fumaroles. As Japanese geochemist Sadao Matsuo once said, "Volcanic gas is a telegram from the Earth's interior." University of Washington volcanologists deployed six seismometers around Rainier to detect the small quakes that often precede an eruption. Others installed tiltmeters, distance-measuring networks, and Global Positioning System satellite receivers to detect subtle ground movements such as bulging, tilting, shifting, and spreading that could herald the next eruption. [Graphic omitted]Observers have known for a long time that watching a volcano can be useful. Tremors and uplifting earth were recorded in Pompeii just before Vesuvius erupted on August 24, A.D. 79. In 1993, geologists trekked to the top of the Galeras volcano in Colombia to test monitoring equipment. One of them, Stanley Williams, reported that he noticed an increase in tiny earthquakes and a decrease in sulfur dioxide emissions, suggesting the mountain had bottled up pressures. Williams ran. Incandescent rocks sizzled past his head, fractured his skull, broke his jaw and both legs and tore off his left ear. He was lucky. Six of his colleagues were killed. Even so, Williams has returned to the site many times to take more measurements. [Graphic omitted][Graphic omitted]Scott believes data from monitoring is the best hope of predicting when and how Rainier might blow next, but it's by no means a guarantee. "There have been plenty of flows gone down that valley many of them during times of eruption, so we may have warning, because we'll sense those," he says. But recent studies also show that big mudflows occurred in the past without contemporaneous eruptions. "It's happened before," Scott says. [Graphic omitted]Living in Orting is like staring up both barrels of a shotgun because the town is situated at the joint of a Y, just below the convergence of the Carbon and Puyallup river valleys. "My concern is that a lahar might happen without warning," Scott says. "The rock, altered and weakened by gases and fluids, generates a water-saturated landslide." As he describes the scenario, he sweeps a hand ominously across a tabletop, burying an imaginary hamlet. "The problem in Orting is that by the time a flow starts and is detected, it could be as little as 45 minutes to an hour from town. So warning has to be automatic, and it has to be reliable. The last thing the authorities want is a false alarm." Scientists and public officials consider this such a likely event that Mount Rainier is the only volcano in the United States other than Mount St. Helens that is permanently monitored for lahars with geophones--microphones placed underground in the river valleys. If the mud slide is coming, they should hear it and be able to trip an alarm system. Conventional seismographs can't distinguish a debris flow from other loud, persistent sounds such as wind or rainstorms and can't pinpoint its location or progress. "Lahars have higher frequency vibrations than earthquakes, and the geophones detect that," Scott says. The $200,000 network consists of five compact, solar-powered sensors in each valley They are set at different levels--two high enough to be safe from floods but likely to be hit by a lahar, and three high enough to probably survive a lahar and keep sending. By the time a big lahar hit Orting, it could be 40 or 50 feet deep--a fatal mud wave. Sensors would send radio signals to the Pierce County Department of Emergency Management, which would spread the alarm. In fact, sirens go off in Orting every month as a test of the system. "It's kind of scary even when you know it's a test," says a resident. With a computerized warning system, an extensive public education program, and yearly volcano drills in which school children are rushed into buses and hauled swiftly out of the valley, Orting is one of the best-prepared towns in the Cascades, says Carolyn Driedger, a U.S. Geological Survey hydrologist who works in public education. But the sophisticated system covers only a single quadrant of the mountain, the west-facing one, considered most dangerous. And while Washington State's 1992 growth-management law requires considering geological hazards when building, the town still permits high-density real estate development. "The best defense against volcanic hazards is intelligent land use," Scott says. Some would say it's too late for that. Orting exists, and so do Ashford, Carbonado, Sumner, Puyallup, Greenwater, Tacoma, and other nearby population centers. No one in those towns seems ready to abandon homes in the shadow of this heap of eroded rock permeated with hot water and steam, covered with a cubic mile of ice, and piled atop a superheated lava chamber--a beautiful, potentially unstable mountain slides in the last 10,000 years. Like John Anderson, most of the people who live here know what the future could hold. And like him, they cling to the hope that it won't happen, or if it does, that they'll be lucky and quick. There's a little decorative wishing well in the Andersons' backyard, and when Anderson stands there gazing up at the mountain, he smiles. "We keep canned goods, water, clothes, and an extra checkbook handy, he says. "Just in case." [Graphic omitted]RELATED ARTICLE: AMERICA'S MOST DANGEROUS VOLCANOES More potentially active volcanoes--68 of them--brood in the United States than in any other country except Japan and Indonesia. And in a given year, a half dozen of the unstable giants erupt--we just don't notice because most of them blow in remote areas in Alaska and Hawaii. * But 20 volatile volcanoes tower over the contiguous states. Mount St. Helens (above) is the only one of those to have erupted since 1950, killing 57 people and destroying a forest big enough to have built 300,000 two-story houses. * Watch out for the others, many of which are overdue to erupt: [Graphic omitted]* MOUNT HOOD, OREGON: Last erupted 200 years ago, producing devastating pyroclastic flows and lahars. Between 1856 and 1865, numerous steam blasts were recorded. * MAUNA LOA, HAWAII: Erupted in 1984. Lava flows threatened Hilo, the largest city on the island of Hawaii. A scientist who saw it blow wrote: "Brilliant lava fountains lit the nighttime sky as fissures opened across the floor of the caldera." * AUGUSTINE VOLCANO, ALASKA: Erupted in 1986, disrupting air traffic and depositing ash in Anchorage. * GLACIER PEAK, WASHINGTON: Has erupted on at least six occasions during the past four millennia. * KILAUEA, HAWAII: Constantly erupting since 1983. Lava has destroyed 180 houses and the historic community of Kalapana, adding nearly one square mile of new land to the island of Hawaii. MOUNT ADAMS, WASHINGTON: Small eruptions about 1,000 years ago. [Graphic omitted]* MOUNT BAKER, WASHINGTON: Steam vents have been active in Sherman Crater, near the summit, since 1975. Erupted in the mid-1800s for the first time in thousands of years. * MOUNT SHASTA, CALIFORNIA: The state's historically most active volcano has erupted every 300 years. * LASSEN PEAK, CALIFORNIA: Erupted most recently during 1914-1917. Debris, lava, and mud covered 6.4 miles. [Graphic omitted]* REDOUBT VOLCANO, ALASKA: Erupted during 1989-1990. Debris flow closed Drift River Oil Terminal. A Boeing 747 lost power in all engines when it flew into the ash plume, but the pilot restarted them just before he crashed into the mountain. [Graphic omitted]* LONG VALLEY, CALIFORNIA: A 10-by-20-mile caldera formed here during a cataclysmic eruption 760,000 years ago. The region, seismically very active, hosts California's largest ski area and in recent years has rumbled and sputtered more than any other volcano in the coterminous states. In November 1997, 2000 earthquakes shook the valley in one day. Carbon dioxide leaking from cracks in the mountain has killed acres of trees. [Graphic omitted]JACK McCLINTOCK [Graphic omitted]("UNDER THE VOLCANO,") lives in Miami, Florida, where trouble usually arrives by sea. "Our immediate danger is hurricanes," he explains, "so I thought it would be interesting to see how some other natural disaster can kill you." Sensing the truth of how others live is a McClintock specialty, whether it involves human life in the shadow of a volcano or animals in trouble. He recalls a story he wrote about puppy mills for Life. "When I look into the eyes of a dog or a cat or a fish," McClintock explains, "I try to jump out of myself and into that other creature." His work has appeared in Rolling Stone, Esquire, Travel & Leisure, and The New York Times. 
*
March 2000 v21 i3 p12. 
Title: Bubbling Under.(observations of the Axial volcano, which is undersea)(Brief Article) 
Author: Jessica Gorman 
VOLCANOES LIKE KRAKATAU AND Mount St. Helens are famous for their destruction, but studies at a unique undersea observatory are revealing a much less familiar, nurturing side to eruptions. Scientists with the New Millennium Observatory, monitoring the ocean bottom 290 miles off the Oregon coast, hit pay dirt in 1998, when Navy hydrophones picked up loud rumblings of the Axial Volcano. A massive outpouring of lava rose up to fill a scar formed where the Pacific Ocean is pulling away from North America, while Axial's crater sank by about 10 feet as part of a process that perpetuates the constant drifting of the continents by creating new ocean floor. A fleet of submersible vehicles, tethered robots, and automatic cameras has gathered data ever since the eruption transformed the landscape nearly a mile down. The eruption also created an unprecedented opportunity for scientists to continuously observe a startling sequence of ecological changes. Even as lava overran old life at the bottom, jets of water squeezed out by the volcano disgorged bacteria that thrive at 220 degrees Fahrenheit--hotter than household boiling water--from even more searing environments below. Despite the complete lack of sunlight, bacterial colonies bloomed around Axial, feeding on volcanic chemicals like hydrogen sulfide, and tube worms arrived seemingly from nowhere. Such scenes of rebirth are probably common along the 40 thousand miles of mid-ocean ridges, where the Earth's crust is torn apart. It will take years for scientists to digest Axial's lessons about the long-hidden connection between undersea volcanoes, the biosphere, and our planet's geological evolution. "We have more direct observations of eruptions on 10 than on the seafloor," says geologist Robert Embley of NOAA'S Pacific Marine Environmental Laboratory in Oregon, who led two of the expeditions around Axial. "This is a whole hidden world." 

<#SCN>
*
Week of Nov. 24, 2001; Vol. 160, No. 21
The Mountain
Take a look at Mount Rainier, America's most dangerous volcano
Sid Perkins
Just after dusk on Aug. 14, at an amphitheater in Mount Rainier National Park's Cougar Rock campground, a deep grumbling sound began to drown out a park ranger who was regaling visitors with an interpretive lecture about the park's natural wonders. The rumble quickly grew to a freight-train-like roar. That's when the ranger ran to a creek near the amphitheater and saw a large flow of mud and debris surging down the normally placid channel. 
"It rumbled up on the ridge until about 10:30 [p.m.]," says Jill Hawk, chief ranger at the national park. Although the campground was never threatened, large pulses of rocky mud continued to sweep down the mountainside for more than 5 hours that evening, and smaller clumps followed for the next 5 days. It was a natural wonder all right. 
Park rangers and scientists flew over the area on Aug. 15 and determined that the event was simply a landslide, not something worse-like an earthquake or volcanic eruption. A week or more of hot, sunny weather had accelerated the melting of a glacier on the south side of the mountain. The excess water had saturated a steep slope of earth and rock. The soggy mix eventually broke away and raced downhill. 
The landslide was small in geologic terms, says Hawk, but it was plenty big enough to scare campers. She notes that the ranger's interpretive lecture that balmy evening turned into an opportunity to discuss the hazards of living in the shadow of a glacier-covered volcano. 
Mount Rainier, locally known simply as "the mountain," is the tallest peak in the Cascades, a chain of mountains that parallels the Pacific Coast from British Columbia to northern California. Mount Rainier's summit bears the largest crest of glacier ice on any mountain in the lower 48 U.S. states. 
Scientists say the height, steepness, and cubic mile of ice make the steep-sloped peak worth watching. However, they're most concerned about the rapidly growing population in the picturesque valleys of the region, which earns the currently dormant Mount Rainier the title of most dangerous volcano in America. 
Powerful surprises 
The landslide of Aug. 14 provides an example of the many powerful surprises that mountains like Rainier can drop on those nearby. The slump of debris began at an altitude of about 2,740 meters above sea level and didn't halt until it had dropped to an altitude of about 762 m, says Patrick T. Pringle, a geologist with Washington State's Department of Natural Resources. 
Similar but larger phenomena, called glacial outburst floods, also strike from on high. These torrents, which are sudden releases of water stored within or at the base of glaciers, can contain about 100,000 cubic meters of water, says Joseph S. Walder, a hydrologist with the U.S. Geological Survey's Cascades Volcano Observatory in Vancouver, Wash. That's the volume of several dozen Olympic-size swimming pools. At peak discharge, these glacial outbursts often match stream flow rates experienced only in the worst of floods. 
At least three dozen glacial outburst floods have occurred in Mount Rainier National Park during the past century. Bridges, roads, and park facilities have been damaged or destroyed on at least 10 occasions. Even so, Walder notes, the effects of such floods don't normally reach beyond the boundaries of the park. 
Mount Rainier's most far-reaching and therefore most dangerous threats derive not from landslides and glacial outburst floods but from its volcanism. 
As with most volcanoes, the mountain's past behavior gives a preview to its future hazards. Written history in the area goes back only about 180 years-a period much too short to adequately represent the activity of a volcano that's hundreds of thousands of years old. Indeed, the documentary evidence includes a record of only one eruption, in the 1840s. But the sedimentary evidence-including deposits rife with pumice and volcanic ash, or tephra-suggests that Mount Rainier has erupted at least 11 times in the past 10,000 years. 
The 1980 eruptions of southwestern Washington's Mount St. Helens showed that even relatively thin accumulations of tephra can disrupt social and economic activity over a broad region. Downwind, in the eastern part of the state, the communities of Yakima, Ritzville, and Spokane received between 1 and 8 centimeters of ash and came to a near standstill for up to 2 weeks. 
More dangerous than tephra are so-called pyroclastic flows, which roll down a volcano rather than towering above it (SN: 1/13/01, p. 21: http://www.sciencenews.org/20010113/fob4.asp). The hot gases, ash, and rock particles form a dense fluid that travels at 10 to 100 m per second and typically hosts temperatures above 300°C. The flows' high densities, velocities, and temperatures blow down, bury, or incinerate everything in their path. 
Scientists have found only a few deposits near Mount Rainier that resulted from pyroclastic flows. One such layer that's about 2,500 years old shows up about 12 kilometers southwest of the volcano's summit, and another, 1,000 or so years old, appears about 11 km northeast of the mountain. However, pyroclastic deposits near the mountain may be rare only because the ash flows were often converted into something more dangerous before they left the mountainside, Walder says. 
Like wet concrete 
When the hot ash in ground-hugging pyroclastic flows sweeps across glaciers, it can melt prodigious amounts of ice and snow. This water mixes with the ash and other debris to form a lahar, which looks and flows like wet concrete. Lahars can travel at speeds up to 100 km per hour on steep slopes near the volcano and can reach much farther from the volcano than pyroclastic flows can. In 1998, the U.S. Geological Survey issued a report stating that lahars pose a greater threat to communities around Mount Rainier than any other volcanic phenomenon. 
More than a dozen volcanic lahars have spewed from Mount Rainier in the past 6,000 years. About 1,200 years ago, a lahar that spilled down valleys on the northeastern slopes of the volcano filled both forks of the White River with 20 to 30 m of debris. The lahar's front edge flowed more than 100 km to reach the spot where the city of Auburn sits today. About 1,000 years before that, a similar lahar filled the Nisqually River southwest of the mountain to depths as great as 40 m and flowed all the way to Puget Sound. 
Scientists have discovered the deposits from more than 60 lahars that occurred in the past 10,000 years. Many of these have been so-called cohesive lahars, which form avalanches that consist primarily of ancient volcanic rocks weakened by exposure to the elements. In particular, sulfur gases spewed by the volcano react with rainwater to form sulfuric acids, which gradually break the rocks down into clay. 
The largest of Mount Rainier's post-Ice Age lahars was the Osceola Mudflow, which struck more than 5,600 years ago and inundated the White River valley with more than 3.8 cubic kilometers of material. Its leading edge reached all the way to Puget Sound. Deposits from this event now cover about 550 square kilometers and extend as far as the Seattle suburb of Kent. 
Another cohesive lahar, dubbed the Electron Mudflow, was spawned by the collapse on the west flank of the volcano about 600 years ago. This lahar was more than 30 m deep when it entered the Puget Sound lowlands near the present-day town of Electron, more than 60 km away. 
All of the major river valleys that drain Mount Rainier have been inundated with lahars, says Pringle. Many of the communities northwest of the volcano have been built in whole or in part atop these sediments. The town of Orting, northwest of the volcano, sits on deposits from both the Osceola and the Electron Mudflows. 
Evidence of lahars' potential to destroy is directly underfoot. When the debris from these lahars comes to rest, it often swallows entire forests. In the area surrounding Orting, for example, the Electron Mudflow entombed a stand of mature Douglas firs. Excavations during construction of subdivisions and sewers around the town in the past 9 years have exhumed the deeply buried stumps of more than 100 trees. The most impressive stump, Pringle notes, measured more than 7.5 m in circumference about 1 m above the ancient ground level. It would be one of the largest Douglas firs in Washington State if it were still alive today. 
The relentless growth of populated subdivisions shows that residents-to-be either don't realize they're in an ashflow-prone zone or aren't worried about it. 
Some members of the emergency-response community have a different view. "I wouldn't build a home or a school there," says Ed Reed, a program manager with the Pierce County Department of Emergency Management in Tacoma. 
Assessing risk 
To assess the risk from Mount Rainier, scientists have combined remote sensing, geologic mapping, and computer modeling into an evaluation of materials that might be swept up into a lahar. 
Volcanic rocks are poor conductors of electricity when they are newly formed, but as they weather and become saturated with water, they conduct electricity up to 300 times better, explains Thomas W. Sisson, a volcanologist with the U.S. Geological Survey in Menlo Park, Calif. Also, fresh volcanic rocks are slightly more magnetic than ones that have been weathered and weakened, he notes. Sisson and his colleagues have flown helicopters equipped with electromagnetic detectors at low altitude over the mountain to locate such degraded rocks, which might crumble and contribute to a mudslide. 
By broadcasting radio waves along flight paths about 250 m apart, the researchers mapped the mineral degradation on Mount Rainier. They found that only the upper, west slope of the volcano has an appreciable thickness of weakened rock. Most material of this kind fell off the mountain 5,600 years ago in the Osceola Mudflow, says Sisson. The horseshoe-shape crater left behind-similar to the one left by Mount St. Helens' 1980 eruption-faces east, he notes, and it filled up with fresh lavas that today form a relatively strong, stable core. Sisson and his team reported their findings in the Feb. 1 Nature. 
He and another group of USGS colleagues recently extended that research. By combining the distribution of weakened rocks with geologic maps that show the steepness of the terrain, they constructed a computer model of the mountain. Then they sliced the model at nearly 30 million different combinations of angle and depth and calculated the capability of the rocks below the slices to resist the force of gravity and hold up the mass of rocks above. In other words, they estimated whether the rocks could prevent a landslide. 
Even though the mountain's north face is the steepest, Sisson and his team found that the upper, west side of the volcano would be most likely to produce lahars that contained more than 0.1 cubic kilometer of material, an amount about one-third the size of the Electron Mudflow. The team published its results in the September Geology. These findings may allow emergency-response officials and scientists to concentrate their monitoring on the portions of Mount Rainier that most threaten the surrounding population. 
Sisson and his colleagues are now turning their remote sensors to Mount Adams and Mount Baker, two other Washington State volcanoes in the Cascade range. Some of the rocks on Mount Adams are about 30,000 years old, and some of those on the slopes of Mount Baker were deposited there about 18,000 years ago. By comparing the depths to which the minerals are weathered, it may be possible to accurately estimate the rate at which rocks lose their strength and capability to support the material upslope. 
Lahars can be triggered by seismic activity or the movement of magma inside a volcano as well as by ash flows sweeping across glaciers. Scientists want to find out how often these debris flows sweep down a mountainside without warning. Sisson says that with one exception-the Electron Mudflow, about 600 years ago-all of Mount Rainier's lahars occurred during periods associated with volcanic activity, when eruptions also laid down tephra deposits. 
Maybe an eruption also stimulated the Electron Mudflow but left no evidence, he adds. It's possible that the eruption produced little or no ash, that the tephra fell in winter and then washed away with the spring melt, or that scientists just haven't found the ash deposit yet. 
A definite link between lahars and volcanic or seismic activity would be good news for those living in the mountain's shadow. Fortunately, remarks Sisson, "volcanoes usually give warning signs that an eruption's on the way." 
References and Sources
References:
Finn, C.A., T.W. Sisson, and M. Deszcz-Pan. 2001. Aerogeophysical measurements of collapse-prone hydrothermally altered zones at Mount Rainier volcano. Nature 409(Feb. 1):600-603.
Hoblitt, R.P., J.S. Walder,. . .P.T. Pringle, et al. 1998. Volcanic Hazards from Mount Rainier, Washington, Revised 1998. U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 98-428. Available at http://vulcan.wr.usgs.gov/Volcanoes/Rainier/Hazards/OFR98-428/framework.html.
Reid, M.E., T.W. Sisson, and D.L. Brien. 2001. Volcano collapse promoted by hydrothermal alteration and edifice shape, Mount Rainier, Washington. Geology 29(September):779-782. 
Further Readings:
Perkins, S. 2001. Scientists analyze volcanoes' killing ways. Science News 159(Jan. 13):21. Available at http://www.sciencenews.org/20010113/fob4.asp.
Simkin, T., L. Siebert, and R. Blong. 2001. Volcano fatalities-Lessons from the historical record. Science 291(Jan. 12):255. 
Sources:
Jill Hawk
Mt. Rainier National Park
Tahoma Woods, Star Route
Ashford, WA 98304-9751
Patrick T. Pringle
Washington State Department of Natural Resources
Division of Geology and Earth Resources
P.O. Box 47007
Olympia, WA 98504-7007
Ed Reed
Pierce County Department of Emergency Management
930 Tacoma Avenue South
Tacoma, WA 98402-2102
Thomas W. Sisson
U.S. Geological Survey
345 Middlefield Road
Menlo Park, CA 94025
Joseph S. Walder
U.S. Geological Survey
Cascades Volcano Observatory
5400 MacArthur Boulevard
Vancouver, WA 98661 

http://www.sciencenews.org/20011124/bob18.asp
From Science News, Vol. 160, No. 21, Nov. 24, 2001, p. 334.
Copyright (c) 2001 Science Service. All rights reserved.

*
April 18, 1998 
When lava and ice clashed on Mount Rainier
by R. Monastersky
During prehistoric eruptions of Mount Rainier, rivers of lava poured out over the glacier-shrouded volcano, leading to epic battles of fire against ice. In most of those contests, the ice won, according to new geologic research on the mountain.
Unable to burn its way through the thickest part of the glaciers, the lava was forced to skirt the edges of the ice fields, leaving behind unusual rock formations that have deceived geologists for decades, report David T. Lescinsky of Arizona State University in Tempe and Thomas W. Sisson of the U.S. Geological Survey in Menlo Park, Calif.
The new understanding "very much changes how you think about the history of the volcano," says Sisson.
Lescinsky and Sisson made their discovery by studying the Washington volcano's large lava flows, many of which sit on top of ridges separating major valleys. These formations have intrigued geologists because lava, like any other fluid, should flow through a valley rather than along the top of a ridge. 
When researchers first mapped Mount Rainier in the late 1950s, they tried to explain the unusual deposits by suggesting that the current topography represents the reverse of the former landscape. According to this theory, the molten rock originally flowed through low-lying valleys, shifting the rivers that had occupied them. Over time, the hardened lava resisted erosion, and the displaced rivers ate away at the softer rock on either side of the deposits. Eventually, the ancient lava flows ended up high on the ridge tops.
Lescinsky and Sisson abandoned this explanation when recent dating of the lava flows revealed that they are much younger than previously supposed -- in some cases only 40,000 years old. Erosion could not have formed major valleys on either side of the lava deposits in so short a time, say the researchers in the April Geology.
When they examined the deposits in detail, evidence of an icy past emerged. Along the sides of the flows, the lava has a glassy texture and breaks into telltale hexagonal columns -- twin indications that the flows cooled rapidly.
Lescinsky and Sisson hypothesize that the lava erupted at a time when glaciers covered more of the mountain than they do now. As the lava crept down the slope, its front hardened where it hit thick, glacier-filled valleys, forcing the lava to flow along the line of least resistance, usually the ridges between the valleys. There, where the ice layer was thinnest, the lava cut steep-sided channels. 
As it flowed along the ridge top, the ice-cooled lava hardened in place. When the glaciers retreated, the lava deposits remained perched on top of the ridges, say Lescinsky and Sisson. They think the same process has occurred on many other glaciated volcanoes.
Their explanation has won over Richard S. Fiske, one of the researchers who proposed the original river valley hypothesis almost 40 years ago. Fiske and his coworkers had assumed that the lava flows were extremely old, but modern dating techniques were not widely available then. "With these new ages, I don't see how our earlier interpretation can be sustained," says Fiske, a geologist with the Smithsonian Institution in Washington, D.C.
The new hypothesis forces geologists to revise their ideas about past eruptions. "What it says to me is that a lot has happened on Mount Rainier just in the last 100,000 years rather than being stretched out over a long period of time," says Fiske.
Geologists consider Mount Rainier one of the greatest volcanic hazards in the United States (SN: 5/28/94, p. 341). Water from its glaciers has seeped into the mountain and corroded much of the rock, making it prone to collapse. During large landslides, glacial ice and rock combine to form massive mudflows. Future slides could sweep over nearby towns. 
From Science News, Vol. 153, No. 16, April 18, 1998, p. 246. 
Copyright ? 1998 by Science Service.


References: 
Lescinsky, D.T., and T.W. Sisson. 1998. Ridge-forming, ice-bounded lava flows at Mount Rainier, Washington. Geology 26(April):351.
Further Readings: 
Monastersky, R. 1994. Mount Rainier threatens with fire and ice. Science News 145(May 28):341.
Sources: 
Richard S. Fiske
Smithsonian Institution
Mineral Science NHB 119
Washington, DC 20560
Thomas W. Sisson
U.S. Geological Survey
Mailstop Code 910
345 Middlefield Road
Menlo Park, CA 94025
*
October 12, 1996
Hawaii's Next Island Suffers Setback
R. Monastersky 

The underwater volcano growing off Hawaii's south coastline collapsed partially during the summer, according to a team of oceanographers scouting the shattered peak from a deep-sea submersible. The cave-in has provided scientists with an unprecedented glimpse into the often tumultuous process that gradually builds up volcanic islands from the ocean floor.
Called Loihi, the submerged mountain is "essentially an island in the womb," says Alexander Malahoff, an oceanographer at the University of Hawaii in Honolulu and a leader of the submersible expedition, which continues through Oct. 12. "It gives us needed access to see how the Hawaiian Islands, the Marshall Islands, Tahiti, or any of the islands in the ocean form. This is the only time we have been able to see one forming in real life." 
Situated 17 miles off the coast of the island of Hawaii, Loihi rises from a base located 18,000 feet -- more than 3 miles -- below sea level to a broad peak at a depth of 3,000 feet. Malahoff estimates it will take another 50,000 years of growth before the summit breaks the waves.
Hawaiian scientists first detected signs of unusual activity at Loihi in mid-July, when a swarm of small earthquakes started to shake the offshore mountain. Over the next 3 weeks, Loihi trembled with more than 5,000 quakes, 100 of which reached magnitude 4 and one of which attained magnitude 5, says Paul Okubo, a seismologist with the U.S. Geological Survey at the Hawaiian Volcano Observatory on Hawaii. 
"This is possibly the largest quake swarm to have been recorded on the volcanoes here in Hawaii," Okubo says.
Malahoff and his colleagues first tried to dive to Loihi in August, but they found the water too turbulent. When they returned in late September, the scientists attempted to visit Loihi's peak, a region named Pele's Vents for its superheated geysers surrounded by a rich community of microorganisms. What they found in its place was a new crater.
"This large hole, three-quarters of a mile in diameter, didn't exist before. Instead, it had been a large hill measuring 1,000 feet high," says Malahoff.
The submersible descended along the vertical walls of the crater, past giant obelisk-shaped rocks ready to break away from the cliff face. During one dive, the researchers had to retreat quickly to the center of the crater when they heard the rumble of tumbling rocks.
At the bottom of the crater, they found thriving colonies of bacteria that had taken up residence in the brand-new landscape. Microbial slime in orange and red hues draped over the rock surface, while lettucelike sheets of bacteria fluttered in the currents from the hot water.
The scientists believe that the collapse took place when lava erupted from deep fractures near the base of Loihi in July. The release of molten rock drained magma from within the mountain, causing the peak to deflate.
Such a giant cave-in should have triggered a large wave, or tsunami, that might have damaged coastal sites in the Hawaiian Islands. But no tsunami developed, suggesting that the collapse occurred over several days instead of instantaneously, says Malahoff. 
In the future, Hawaiians may not escape so painlessly. The seafloor around Loihi and the other Hawaiian volcanoes is littered with debris from immense prehistoric landslides, one of which produced waves more than 1,000 feet high (SN: 4/8/95, p. 216).
To monitor geologic unrest on Loihi, Malahoff and his colleagues plan to place seismometers and chemical sensors on a stable section of the summit and connect them to the island of Hawaii via fiber-optic cable.
*
Nov 23, 1985 v128 p326(1). 
Title: Colombia volcano: what next? 
Author: Stefi Weisburd 
In the valleys below Nevado del Ruiz, the effects of the Colombian volcano's eruption last week have been devastatingly clear. Torrential floods of mud and water, triggered when two blasts Nov. 13 melted snow and ice crowning the mountain, raged down the volcano's steep northeast flanks at speeds of up to perhaps 90 miles per hour and flowed into river channels, engulfing the town of Armero and killing more than 22,000 people. But as to the volcano itself--how the blasts occurred, if there were precursory signals and whether the volcano is gearing up for more eruptions -- scientists have been considerably less certain. "We really don't know what happened on the mountain yet," says Patrick Muffler of the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) in Menlo Park, Calif. "Before we can ask the scientific questions, we need hands-on knowledge" of the volcano. And that is just beginning to happen. Darrell Herd of the USGS in Reston, Va., was able to fly over the volcano last weekend in spite of bad weather. According to USGS colleagues, he saw mudflows in all valleys draining the volcano and spotted two separate plumes within the enlarged crater. He estimated that only about 5 percent of the snow and ice had melted during the eruption, so the greatest worry is that more mudslides could be triggered even if the volcano remains relatively tame. Based on the behavior of other subduction zone volcanoes (which are driven by the melting of an oceanic plate as it descends under a continent) such as Mt. St. Helens, scientists say the chances of another large eruption soon are not great. But they really can't be sure. That is why they have begun to set up real-time monitoring of the seismic rumblings and deformation of the volcano. Two teams of USGS specialists, for example, arrived in Colombia last weekend with 3,000 pounds of equipment to replace and upgrade the seismic stations that had been placed on the volcano when it first began to release steam and ash on Sept. 11. On a broad geologic time scale, the eruption was not a surprise. Herd had shown in 1974 that major eruptions of Nevado del Ruiz occurred about every 300 years, and since the last large blast took place in 1595, another was due. The Sept. 11 eruption of steam and ash was another clue that alerted the Colombians. It also produced a relatively small mudslide, which raced down the volcano so fast that it leaped across waterfalls and ran up the sides of the channel bobsled-style, according to Herd. Hazard maps, drawn up in October as a result of studies conducted by an international team, apparently predicted very well where the November mudslides would occur. But the eruption happened before the Colombians could implement emergency plans, says Herd. USGS scientists still don't know whether there were recognizable precursory signs in the days prior to the eruption. Compared with many other places, "there's virtually no volcanic monitoring in South America," notes Muffler. Adds Herd, "I'm sure this eruption will heighten Colombian, as well as international, concern about the potential for other possible dangerous volcanoes.... Are there some long-term lessons that we can learn from this tragedy that can be applied elsewhere?" 
*
June 22, 1985 v127 p390(1). 
Title: Under the volcano: lava in the lab. 
Author: Stefi Weisburd 
Under the volcano: Lava in the lab Heat is the engine of the earth. As it escapes from the core, heat has made mountains, driven volcanos and churned up the earth's mantle, from which the atmosphere, oceans and continents were derived. One way to learn about the history of the planet as it cools from its rather hot beginnings is to study how magmas, or molten rocks, are formed in the mantle before they are spewed out onto the surface. But duplicating mantle conditions in the laboratory has been hampered by a lack of equipment capable of simultaneously subjecting large rock samples to high temperatures and high pressures. After a decade of development, several Japanese researchers now have such equipment at hand. And one of the first important fruits of their labors is a report in the June 13 NATURE on the melting of natural rocks to form komatiite, a very hot, magnesium-rich lava that erupted on the earth 2.5 billion to 3.8 billion years ago during the Archean eon (the oldest time from which rocks still exist) and, with one exception, has not erupted since. The recent experiment, performed at Okayama University by Eiichi Takahashi and Christopher M. Scarfe, has shown that komatiite can be created at much higher pressures--and hence depths in the earth --than was commonly believed. As such, it has considerable bearing on the makeup and evolution of the Archean mantle, about which there is much speculation but few known facts. Most scientists believe that the upper mantle today is made of peridotite, a magnesium-rich mineral. Different magmas, distinguished in part by their magnesium content, can be generated by melting peridotite under various conditions. Since komatiites were discovered in 1969, the prevailing theory held that they formed, like the basalt lavas common today, at shallow depths and low pressures. The major problem with this idea, says Claude T. Herzberg at Rutgers, The State University, in New Brunswick, N.J., is that it requires that the peridotite melt almost completely and in such a way that the solid crystals remain in contact with the liquid phase. In practice, the solid bits tend to fall away from the liquid, so Herzberg and others have proposed instead that komatiites could come from peridotite with only a small degree of melting but at very high pressures. This is just what Takahashi and Scarfe confirmed experimentally. Their study, using a 5,000-ton press, produced komatiites from natural peridotite rocks subjected to temperatures of almost 2,000|C and pressures up to 14 billion Pascals (GPa)--three to four times greater than the pressures of past experiments, in which the first drops of liquid produced were lower-magnesium magmas like basalt. Since pressures increase with depth in the earth, "this is very strong evidence that melting in the Archean took place at much greater depths than it is taking place today,' says Herzberg. "The reason there are no komatiites erupting today is that the depth of melting is not great enough; as the earth has cooled, the depth at which melting takes place has progressively moved toward the surface.' The recent experiment also supports another of Herzberg's predictions by showing that the "melting interval' of peridotite decreases with increasing pressure. The melting interval is the difference between the temperature at which crystals start to form in a cooled liquid and the temperature at which the first drop of liquid appears in a heated solid. For peridotite at the surface, this interval is about 600|C. Takahashi and Scarfe showed that it dropped to about 100|C at 10 GPa. Herzberg thinks the melting interval will drop to 50|C or so and then start to increase again with increasing pressure. "And when that happens the mineral that first crystallizes as the temperature drops will change,' he says. At low pressures this mineral is olivine, but no one knows what it will be at high pressures. "It's one of the exciting things that has to be done . . . that's going to tell us something about the mineralogy of the lower mantle,' he adds. Scarfe, on sabbatical from the University of Alberta in Edmonton, says he and Takahashi are planning more experiments this summer that will extend the pressure range to 20 GPa. With some care, their equipment can go up to 30 GPa. Meanwhile, researchers at the State University of New York (SUNY) at Stony Brook are in the process of acquiring a system almost identical to that of Takahashi. According to SUNY's Robert Liebermann, the new equipment will be ready for experiments in 1986 and will be the first of its kind in North America. 
*
June 30, 1990 v137 n26 p407(1). 
Title: 'Young' volcano near nuclear waste site. (Yucca Mountain, Nevada) 
Author: Richard Monastersky 
'Young' volcano near nuclear waste site New research indicates the Department of Energy significantly overestimated the age of a volcano near Yucca Mountain, Nev., the proposed site for the nation's first high-level nuclear waste dump. The age revision fuels an already heated controversy over the site's suitability as a safe storage place for nuclear power plant wastes, which remain dangerous for 10,000 years. The volcano, called the Lathrop Wells cone, lies about 20 kilometers from the proposed location for the underground waste repository. Energy Department studies in the mid-1980s indicated the volcano last erupted around 270,000 years ago. But a comparison of Lathrop Wells with another volcano now suggests a much younger age of less than 30,000 years, and probably even less than 20,000, report Stephen G. Wells of the University of New Mexico in Albuquerque and his colleagues. "What surprised us was the relatively youthful appearance of the volcano," says Wells. By studying the extent of erosion and soil development on Lathrop Wells, the researchers compared this volcanic cinder cone with a similar cone in southeastern California, indirectly dated at about 15,000 to 20,000 years old. The comparison suggests the volcanoes are of equal age, they assert in the June GEOLOGY. Wells says some experimental dating techniques indicate that Lathrop Wells formed as recently as 20,000 years ago. Other scientists dispute the notion that Lathrop Wells erupted that recently. Brent Turrin of the U.S. Geological Survey in Menlo Park, Calif., has used the radioactive decay of potassium-40 into argon-40 to date lava flows from Lathrop Wells and the California cone. His findings suggest both volcanoes last erupted lava more than 90,000 years ago. While Turrin acknowledges that the volcanoes look young, he says his work raises a question: "What is young when you look at a cinder cone?" Wells says the age discrepancy may signal a problem with the standard theory that cinder cone eruptions happen all in one shot during a short period of time. Instead, the volcanoes might erupt lava and then, tens of thousands of years later, create a cinder cone. Carl A. Johnson, a geologist with the State of Nevada's Agency for Nuclear Projects in Carson City, contends that the new information about Lathrop Wells could constitute a cause for concern. "It is certainly suggesting to us that there's some major questions as to whether the site is a suitable one or not." Johnson says a volcanic eruption near the repository could trigger changes in the groundwater system, perhaps raising the water table underneath the buried repository. That could enable radioactive elements to escape into the environment faster than the regulations allow. But Bruce M. Crowe, a coauthor of the GEOLOGY report, maintains that the young age of Lathrop Wells -- and the chance of a future eruption -- would not significantly threaten the repository. Crowe, a volcanologist with Los Alamos (N.M.) National Laboratories, heads the Energy Department team assessing volcanic hazards at Yucca Mountain. According to his calculations, the age revision for Lathrop Wells does not justify disqualifying the site. 

*
March 8, 1986 v129 p152(1). 
Title: Signs of New Zealand monster volcano. (erupted 254,000 years ago) 
Signs of New Zealand monster volcano Scientists have discovered traces of what they think is one of the largest documented volcanic eruptions in the Southern Hemisphere. As reported in the Feb. 13 NATURE, P.C. Froggatt at Victoria University of Wellington in New Zealand and co-workers sampled, in marine sediment cores, a thick, widespread ash layer from New Zealand's Taupo volcano, which erupted about 254,000 years ago. Estimates for the total ejected volcanic material make "this Taupo eruption the largest in the Southern Hemisphere in late Quaternary times [the last 2 or 3 million years]," they say. The dispersal of the ash indicates that the ash reached into the stratosphere. The volcanic matter from Taupo "is so widespread that the eruption possibly caused disruption to the atmosphere and climate," the researchers conclude, "and material from this eruption may be recognizable in sediments 10,000 kilometers from the source." 

*
June 21, 1986 v129 p390(2). 
Title: Scientists predict second Ruiz blast. (Colombian volcano) 
Author: Mary Murray 
Scientists predict second Ruiz blast Mass evacuation of the Nevado del Ruiz mountainside began June 13, the 39th day in a row that scientists detected ominous rubling inside the volcano. Colombian officials -- remembering the eruption on NOV. 13, 1985, when rivers of mud killed more than 22,000 people (SN:11/23/85, p.326) -- want everyone out of the way before the next flare-up. They have told 25,000 people to move to refugee caps in Libano, 17 miles southeast of Ruiz. The prolonged seismic activity in the mountain suggests that magma (molten rock) is moving near the surface. Increasing sulfur dioxide spewing from volcanic vents also indicates upward-moving magma. And recently, scientists have measured subtle changes in the volcano's shape, which may represent the heaving and sighing that precede a great volcanic cough. "We think the likelihood of a further eruption within days or weeks is very high," says Hansjurgen Meyer, scientist in charge of the Observatorio Volcanologico de Colombia in Manizales, 18 miles northwest of Ruiz. But scientists may be reading the signs wrong, Meyers says, because they know so little about Ruiz. "You can only do a very basic kind of forecast when you haven't been able to observe several cycles of a volcano's activity, and so far we have only seen one," he says. Geologists try to infer the mountain's behavior from that of other subduction volcanoes -- created by the melting of oceanic plates as they descend under continents -- and from the geologic record in the rocks of Ruiz. They know, for example, that Ruiz belches clouds of ash and rubble, as Mt. St. Helens does, but it does not send out racing rivers of lava as do the rift volcanoes of Hawaii. They also know the 18,000-foot Ruiz has erupted 10 times in 10,000 years, and it almost always sets off mudflows, called lahars. Direct measurements of Ruiz date only from late 1984, when mountain climbers began feeling earthquakes and seeing large plumes of gas. And it wasn't until July 1985 that four portable seismographs were put on the mountain. On Sept. 11 there was a minor eruption of steam, ash and rock. Nobody was hurt, but the event led to increased surveillance of the volcano. By October, geologists had installed additional seismographs and set up tiltmeters to record changes in the mountain's shape. But the volcano gave no sure signals that it would erupt. Even on Nov. 12, when geologists climbed to the summit to collect gas samples, they saw no signs of an imminent explosion. The Nov. 13 eruption was much smaller in volume than the largest blast of Mt. St. Helens in 1980. But the lahars made it the second-worst volcano disaster of the century. (The worst was the 1902 eruption of Mt. Pelee in Martinique, in which 28,000 died.) Hot ash and gravel seared about 10 percent of the mountain glacier. Melted ice flooded down, gathering dirt and rubble on its way. In three hours, the towns of Armero and Chinchina were washed out. Ruiz then was quiet until late April, when seismic activity began to increase. On May 4, there began a series of harmonic tremors that lasted until June 14. On June 15 and 16, the tremors were replaced by a swarm of small earthquakes. On June 17, the tremors resumed. It's difficult to tell exactly what the latest seismicity means, because it did not occur the same way last fall. Rumbling before the September eruption lasted only a week, according to David Harlow of the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) in Menlo Park, Calif. Between Oct. 1 and Nov. 11, there was little seismicity. Tremors began again only two days before the Nov. 13 eruption. Recent changes in the mountain's shape are puzzling as well, because there are few comparison data. Deformation measurements were taken for only one month before the November eruption. "We should have started measuring a year and a half ago so we would know how much the magma store grew before it erupted," says Norman G. Banks of the Cascades Volcano Observatory in Vancouver, Wash., who is project chief of the USGS team studying Ruiz. "We don't know if here is a much larger amount there still to be tapped." Generally, the more magma present, the more volcanic activity expected. Some scientists have speculated that the lahars could be worse next time because they can flow through fresh, clean pathways. On the other hand, the ash layer from November might protect the ice cap from melting as quickly next time. Ultimately, the lahars will be determined by the size of the eruption, which scientists cannot predict, Harlow says. As scientists study signs of eruption, Colombian government and Red Cross officials try to persuade mountain residents to move. "Some insist on staying where they are, and some wait for government promises that they will be given other homes," Meyer says. Once the people are resettled, he adds, they are likely to stay away for years, until Ruiz completes its volcanic cycle. 

*
Sept 6, 1986 v130 p149(1). 
Title: Augustine volcano erupts quietly. (Alaska
Author: Trina Kleist 
Augustine volcano erupts quietly Avalanches, glowing lava and 10,000-foot-high trails of ash and steam signaled on Aug. 20 that the Augustine Island volcano in Alaska entered a new phase of activity, the third outburst since it erupted last March 27 (SN:5/17/86, p.309). Located at the entrance to Cook Inlet, 175 miles southwest of Anchorage, the 4,025-foot volcano is also sending dense flows of ash and steam down its slopes and building a new dome of molten rock to replace the one it partially blew off in March. This activity is characteristic of volcanoes having magma rich in silica. According to Charlotte Rowe, a graduate student at the University of Alaska in Fairbanks who is conducting research on the volcano, the magma flowing up through the volcano is thick and slow-moving, unlike the runny magma of the silica-poor Hawaiian volcanoes. "It oozes out like toothpaste coming out of a tube,' Rowe says. When it reaches the surface, the magma tends to cool and plug up the opening, forming a dome. Silica-rich magma also holds a higher proportion of gases, which bubble out of the upwelling molten rock. If a dome seals the opening of the volcano, the pressure builds up inside until the gas explodes in a new eruption. The March explosion, says Rowe, was mainly the release of gases. The magma is continuing to ooze upward, cracking open the remains of the old dome and daily sending three to four avalanches of debris down the slopes. Rowe says the absence of significant earthquakes at this stage indicates that the magma now flowing is part of the eruption that began violently in March. "If there were new magma from deeper levels . . . we would expect to see seismic activity similar to that just prior to the March eruption,' she says. While the recent activity could continue for months or years, the likelihood of another explosion soon is "probably less than half.' Rowe notes, however, that sparse information about the volcano makes predictions difficult. Photo: In a calmer continuation of its March eruption (left), Alaska's Augustine volcano spews ash and steam (right). 

*
Jan 24, 1987 v131 p53(1). 
Title: Celebration on a volcano. (eruption of Kilauea in Hawaii) 
Celebration on a volcano The Kilauea volcano sure knows how to prepare for a party. During the two months prior to last week's festivities commemorating the 75th anniversary of the nearby Hawaiian Volcano Observatory (HVO) and the opening of its new facilities, the volcano added 18 acres of lava to the island of Hawaii. And since the current eruption began three years ago, Kilauea has produced a record-breaking 850 million cubic yards of lava. That amount would ocver, to a depth of almost 31 feet, four lanes of an interstate highway from New York to San Francisco, according to Dallas L. Peck, director of the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS), which manages the HVO. The new HVO building, perched onKilauea's rim, is equipped with an elevated tower from which both Kilauea and the neighboring Mauna Loa volcano can be observed. Peck says the HVO, which is the United States' first and oldest volcano observatory, has been responsible for the development of most of the volcano monitoring techniques now used worldwide. After dedication ceremonies Jan. 16, volcanologists were meeting Jan. 19--25 for a USGS symposium entitled "How Volcanoes Work." 

*
August 31, 1991 v140 n9 p132(2). 
Title: Pinatubo's impact spreads around the globe. (climatic effect of Philippine volcano) 
Author: Richard Monastersky 
More than 10,000 kilometers lie between the United States and the Philippines, but the eruption of Mt. Pinatubo in June may increase the risk of skin cancer in North America next summer, according to some preliminary estimates of the volcano's effect on stratospheric ozone. Scientists also expect the eruption to cool the globe for the next few years -- a climatic twist that would complicate efforts to discern whether greenhouse-gas pollution is currently warming the Earth. Pinatubo can wreak such distant and long-lasting effects because its eruption lofted millions of tons of sulfur dioxide gas into the stratosphere. As winds blew the volcanic cloud westward, the gas molecules reacted with water in the atmosphere to form tiny droplets, or aerosols, of sulfuric acid, which will stay in the stratosphere for two to three years before they fall. Some computer models of atmospheric chemistry suggest that this huge increase in sulfur dioxide aerosols could thin the protective ozone layer, allowing more harmful ultraviolet radiation to reach Earth's surface. "We found a substantial ozone decrease, especially in the mid- and high-latitudes, and especially in winter," says Guy P. Brasseur, director of the atmospheric chemistry division at the National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) in Boulder, Colo. Scientists believe sulfuric acid aerosols affect ozone levels through a complex cascade of events. The aerosols provide tiny surfaces on which certain nitrogen molecules can react. These reactions alter the chemistry of the stratosphere, causing "safe" chlorine molecules to transform into ones that can destroy ozone. Satellite and aircraft measurements indicate Pinatubo was probably the largest volcanic eruption of the century, belching out at least twice as much sulfur dioxide as the 1982 eruption of Mexico's El Chichon. Using these data, Brasseur's model calculates that the aerosol increase will cause a 15 percent reduction in midlatitude ozone values during winter. Brausseur cautions, however, that these predictions include significant uncertainties. Susan Solomon, an atmospheric chemist at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration in Boulder, used a different model to calculate the effect of the volcanic aerosols. Although she says it's too early to discuss specific results, she hints that her model predicts an ozone decrease even greater than that calculated by Brasseur. Unlike Solomon, however, Brasseur also found substantial ozone depletions--on the order of 6 to 8 percent--in the mid-latitudes during summer, when ultraviolet levels reach their yearly maximum. Sasha Madronich of NCAR calculates that such thinning would allow summertime levels of ultraviolet radiation to reach 18 percent higher than normal in the northern mid-latitudes, which includes much of the United States, europe and the Soviet Union. The boost in radiation would increase skin cancer risk and could generate several thousand additional cases of melanoma in the United States alone over the next few decades, estimates Madronich. Other atmospheric chemists, however, say discussions of health problems are premature because scientists remain unsure whether the eruption will spur any significant ozone decrease. "We don't really have the models or the measurements that would allow us to confidently make such predictions," says Michael J. Prather, an atmospheric chemist at NASA's Goddard Institute for Space Studies in New York City. According to Prather, only about half of the atmospheric-research community is currently betting the volcano will significantly decrease ozone levels. The answer should become clearer this winter, after the aerosols spread toward the North Pole. Long before the eruption, scientists began planning a major research campaign to probe the fate of ozone int he stratosphere over the northern mid-latitudes and polar regions. They want to understand why wintertime ozone levels have declined by 6 to 8 percent over the mid-latitudes during the last decade. The planned measurements should also detect effects of the volcanic aerosols, providing the data needed to make better predictions of the possible summertime ozone thinning, Prather says. The same veil of sulfuric acid aerosols that threatens ozone also reflects sunlight back toward space, slightly dimming light reaching the Earth's surface. Climate experts say the Pinatubo aerosols will lower average world temperatures during the next several years, temporarily reversing the warming trend of the last two decades. Global temperatures may not fall significantly in 1991 and 1992, because an El Nino developing in the Pacific will help warm the Earth, slightly offsetting the aerosol cooling. But when the El Nino wanes in about a year, Pinatubo aerosols could chill the Earth by about 0.5 [degrees]C, says James Hansen of NASA's Goddard Institute. Before the eruption, Hansen and others had predicted that the behavior of global temperatures during the 1990s would provide a good test for theories forecasting a global warming from greenhouse-gas pollution. Because Pinatubo's cooling should temporarily mask any long-term warming trend, the eruption will make the climate record more complex and difficult to interpret. But even with several years of cooling, the 1990s should still turn out warmer than the 1980s if the greenhouse warming is currently underway, Hansen says. 

*
Sept 14, 1991 v140 n11 p175(1). 
Title: Rock flows when ice goes. (Iceland's Snaefellsjokull volcano and climatic changes) 
Abstract: Analysis of lava from Iceland's Snaefellsjokull volcano indicates that the end of the last ice age 15,000 years ago led to increased melting of the Earth's mantle. This is the first evidence that climatic change can affect the mantle. 
Professor Lidenbrock and his faint-hearted nephew climbed straight into the maw of the Icelandic volcano Snaefellsjokull in Jules Verne's classic Journey to the Center of the Earth. Geologists are now following that fictional path, using the same volcano to explore the planet's interior. Analyses of lava at Snaefellsjokull reveal that climate changes occuring 15,000 years ago dramatically affected processes deep within the Earth, report Bjorn S. Hardarson and J. Godfrey Fitton of the University of Edinburgh in Scotland. Their study, discussed in the Sept. 5 NATURE, focuses on the end of the last ice age, when Iceland lost its 2-kilometer-thick blanket of ice. According to theory, the melting of that heavy load should have decreased the pressure on Earth's mantle, making it easier for the solid mantle rock to melt. Hardarson and Fitton find support for the theory in their analyses of the lava from Snaefellsjokull. Concentrations of certain elements in the rock suggest that mantle melting doubled when the ice load disappeared, they report. "This is the first time anyone has ever observed climatic change to have any effect on the behavior of mantle processes," Fitton told SCIENCE NEWS. 

*
April 25, 1992 v141 n17 p260(1). 
Title: Huge landslide threatens at Alaskan volcano. (Mount St. Augustine) 
Author: Richard Monastersky 
Abstract: Proposed 1993 federal budget cuts would reduce the volcanic hazard program of the US Geological Survey. A major avalanche is predicted for Alaska's Mount St. Augustine, based on past research. Geologists feel monitoring programs are necessary. 
Jutting steeply out of the waters of Cook Inlet, Alaska's Mount St. Augustine presents a stony profile that seems to transcend time. But a study of this active volcano indicates that every 150 to 200 years, large parts of the mountain have collapsed and fallen into the sea. If the past cycle continues, a major avalanche could come during the next several decades, volcanologists warn. In light of these new findings, geological researchers question the wisdom of the President's proposed 1993 budget, which seeks far-reaching cuts in programs that monitor earthquake and volcanic hazards in the United States. Most volcanologists have thought that major landslides occur only rarely on volcanoes, perhaps once or twice in the lifetime of the mountain. But the new study shows at least one volcano has a habit of collapsing. James E. Beget and Juergen Kienle of the Alaska Volcano Observatory and the University of Alaska in Fairbanks report in the April 23 Nature that large landslides have shorn Mount St. Augustine a minimum of 11 times in the past 1,800 to 2,000 years. "This is the first time this type of behavior has been documented for a volcano," says Beget. He says volcanologists have not studied most of the other volcanoes in the world well enough to know if they behave the same. Using the carbon-14 dating technique, the Alaskan researchers determined the ages of individual debris layers piled one atop the other. The most recent slide occurred during an eruption in 1883. At that time, the north side of the 1,200-meter-tall volcano slide into the sea, leaving a large horseshoe-shaped crater. Such an avalanche might have carried away about 10 percent of the volcano, estimates Lee Siebert of the Smithsonian Institution in Washington, D.C. Since 1883, a series of eruptions has filled in the hole left by the last landslide. With each successive eruption, the top of the volcano grows steeper and more unstable, says Beget, who believes St. Augustine has reached a point where another collapse is possible. Judging from past deposits, the next landslide would barrel down the north side of the volcano. As it crashed into the sea, the debris would generate a tsunami wave heading in the direction of cities and oil platforms in Cook Inlet. St. Augustine is only one of many active volcanoes in the western states. Despite the potential threat, the proposed 1993 budget for the U.S. Geological Survey would reduce its volcanic hazard program by nearly a quarter and slash 83 percent from current federal funding for the Alaska Volcano Observatory. The earthquake hazard program would also suffer a large cut. 

*
24, 1993 v144 n4 p59(1). 
Title: Where have all the earthquakes gone? Scientists wonder why part of Hawaii's Kilauea volcano has gone quiet. 
Author: Richard Monastersky 
Abstract: Geophysicists James H. Dieterich and Paul Okubo believe that a lull in seismic activity on one side of Hawaii's Kilauea volcano may indicate that a large earthquake could soon take place there. The region has shown a pattern of inactivity before large quakes. S
The sky turns a seasick shade of green, signaling the impending arrival of a torrential downpour, complete with lightning galore and howling winds. But moments before the first fat raindrops hit the ground, the gale ceases abruptly in a pregnant pause--the calm before the storm. Seismologists have their own version of that phenomenon. Called seismic quiescence, the term describes how a particular patch of ground will sometimes stop producing its normal quotient of minor earthquakes just before a big one hits. That's why geophysicists James H. Dieterich and Paul Okubo grew interested when they noticed a lull in tremors on one side of Hawaii's Kilauea volcano during the last few years. The quiescent area sits on Kilauea's eastern flank, just south of the volcanically active east rift zone, according to Dieterich, a researcher at the U.S. Geological Survey in Menlo Park, Calif. Okubo works at the USGS' Hawaiian Volcano Observatory. On its own, a simple observation of quiescence might not capture much attention among seismologists. Because faults behave irregularly from one year to the next, some regions may take a rest for a short spell without ever generating a big quake. Quiescence does not always precede something important. But the Kilauea case stands out because Dieterich and Okubo have discovered that the currently inactive region has a history of going silent before large quakes. The quiescent zone is an irregularly shaped block of crust measuring about 18 kilometers on its longest side and extending to a depth of 10 kilometers. Researchers believe that a major fault cuts through the bottom of that block, forming a nearly horizontal break that separates the upper crust from deeper regions. Riding on that fault, the top layer is slipping toward the ocean with unusual haste. Surveys using Global Positioning System satellites show the southeastern part of the volcano moving seaward at the geologically exceptional rate of 10 centimeters per year. Calculations suggest that at the depth of the fault, the top layer is slipping even faster -- at 25 centimeters per year, the fastest creep ever detected along a fault (SN: 6/12/93, p.382). In 1975, this same fault generated a magnitude 7.2 quake near the town of Kalapana that caused part of the south coast of the island of Hawaii to drop by 3.5 meters, spawning a wall of water--a tsunami -- more than 14 meters high. In the late 1970s, while studying seismic records of Kilauea, seismologist Max Wyss and his colleagues noticed that the region involved in the Kalapana shock had grown quiet for four years prior to the quake. The quiescent region that Dieterich and Okubo have found coincides with the one Wyss identified before that 1975 temblor. That correlation caused the two USGS researchers to take a closer look at a magnitude 6.1 quake that struck the Kalapana region in 1989. Sure enough, this shock also followed three years of reduced seismic activity in the same region. While seismologists have noted many cases of prequake quiescence, the Kilauea example marks the first known case of quiescence repeating itself in the same region before successive quakes, Dieterich says. The big question, of course, is whether the pattern will hold up. Will the current calm lead to another major Kalapana quake? At present, Dieterich and Okubo say they don't know what to make of the quiescence. But they are certain one thing: They do not want their observations to be misconstrued as an earthquake forecast. "We're not predicting an earthquake. We think there are many questions that need to be addressed related to the seismic quiescence before any such steps could be taken," says Dieterich, who presented the pair's findings last month to the National Earthquake Prediction and Evaluation Council, of which he is a member. Aside from assessing actual predictions, the council also reviews current research at seismologically active sites in the United States. One interpretation of the quiescence is that it represents a finale to past quakes rather than a prelude to future ones, notes Dieterich. The current quiet may be just an abrupt end to the aftershocks that followed the Kalapana earthquakes of 1975 and 1989. Wyss, another member of the council, favors this idea. "I would not interpret this as a precursor. I would interpret it as meaning that the story is now over. The energy has been depleted and it will be quiet for a number of years," says Wyss, now at the University of Alaska in Fairbanks. Dieterich says the previous large earthquakes and quiescence periods at Kalapana complicate the seismic story at Kilauea. Each of the previous events drastically altered the frequency of small earthquakes, making it difficult to determine the region's baseline level of activity, a reference needed to interpret the current quiescence. Despite the questions, Dieterich and Okubo think the drop in seismic activity may well turn out to be important. "I have a healthy dose of skepticism about the quiescence, but the observations are too interesting to ignore," Dieterich says. Geophysicist Paul Segall, with the USGS in Menlo Park, has reached the same conclusion based on his study of Kilauea's seaward slip. Says Segall, "We've got a chunk of Earth that we know is moving at a pretty astronomical rate, and we know it has generated large earthquakes and tsunamis in the past. We clearly have to take a closer look at this area." 

*
Feb 13, 1993 v143 n7 p101(1). 
Title: First direct measure of volcano's blast. 
Author: Daniel Pendick 
Abstract: Volcanologist Hiromitsu Taniguchi and Geologist Keiko Suzuki-Kamata have obtained the first direct measurement of a shock wave created by a volcanic eruption. 
Since Japan's Unzen volcano awoke in 1990 from a 200-year repose, lava has oozed from a vent on its eastern slope, forming an unstable dome that looms menacingly over towns below. Periodically, part of the dome shears off or collapses, releasing a cascade of debris with explosive force. Volcanologists yearn to measure directly the energy released during such volcanic events. But such close-up, derailed observations pose extreme danger, and the fury unleashed by a dome collapse can turn expensive instruments into scorched, shattered hulks. Now, using a simple, rugged device designed to gauge military munitions and other explosives, Japanese scientists have achieved the first direct measurement of the energy released during a volcanic blowout. Volcanologist Hiromitsu Taniguchiof the Science Education Institute in Osaka and geologist Keiko Suzuki-Kamata of Kobe University report their findings in the Jan. 22 GEOPHYSICAL RESEARCH LETTERS. The researchers measured the shock wave created by a dome collapse on June 8, 1991, and then calculated the pent-up energy required to generate it - the equivalent of about 12,000 tons of TNT. Previously, volcanologists relied on more approximate measurements. In one widely used method, researchers locate a chunk of debris and calculate the energy required to hurl it from the volcano to its landing place. To make their measurements, Taniguchi and Suzuki-Kamata set up three meters within the volcano's destructive range. The pressure-sensitive part of the meter consists of a hollow chamber about two inches wide, covered with a thin lead plate. The sensor is mounted on a sturdy pole driven into the ground. The researchers calculated the June 8 shock wave at 75 meters per second at the source on the basis of how severely the wave deformed the lead plate as it passed the meter at Taruki-daichi, a town 2,700 meters northeast of the lava dome. That's powerful enough to knock over a person standing in Taruki-daichi, they report. The new method of measuring may reduce inaccuracies, says Richard B. Waitt, a volcanologist at the U.S. Geological Surveys Cascades Volcano Observatory in Vancouver, Wash. "It's a far more direct means of [making measurements]," he says. "This allows some calculations as to what the volcano is capable of" Unzen has proved capable of quite a lot. The blast that the Japanese researchers measured came just five days after a massive flow of hot ash and debris from a dome collapse killed 43 people in Kita-kamikoba, a town directly in the firing line of the volcano's east-lacing vent. Direct measurements of volcanic blasts may provide a means of checking the theoretical models some volcanologists have created to explore the physics of crumbling lava domes, says volcanologist Jonathan H. Fink of Arizona State University in Tempe, who helped develop such a mathematical tool, "It's interesting that the number these [researchers] came up with - 75 meters per second as the maximum velocity -- is well within the range that we would calculate based on the model," Fink comments. - D. Pendick 

*
June 12, 1993 v143 n24 p382(1). 
Title: Fastest fault in the world? (fault below Hawaii's Kilauea volcano) Author: Richard Monastersky 
Volcanologists often call Hawaii's Kilauea the world's most active volcano - a title bestowed because it erupts so frequently New evidence collected by Global Positioning System satellites suggests that Kilauea may also have the world's fastest-moving fault, reports Susan Owen of the U.S. Geological Survey in Menlo Park, Calif. Measurements made in 1990 and 1992 show that the volcano's southern flank has edged seaward at a pace of 10 centimeters per year. Owen and her co-workers think the flank is sliding atop a nearly horizontal fault that lies 9 kilometers below the surface. Their calculations suggest that the rock along the fault is slipping at 25 cm per year, making this the fastest known fault, says Owen. Kilauea has generated large quakes in the past, and it remains unclear whether the fast but peaceful motion now going on represents a harbinger of a strong jolt. 

*
Dec 18, 1993 v144 n25-26 p414(1). 
Title: Digging up the dirt on Mauna Loa. (Hawaiian volcano studied) 
How much time did it take to build Hawaii's massive Mauna Loa, the world's largest volcano? Much longer than scientists had thought, says a team currently drilling into the side of this fire-spouting mountain, most of which lies underwater. Working near the city of Hilo on the big island of Hawaii, the research team has bored 1,100 meters into the ground to chart the history of lava flows that have poured out of Mauna Loa and its extinct sibling, Mauna Kea. Before starting the project, volcanologists had believed Mauna Loa's age might range up to 500,000 years. But the rocks pulled up during the drilling experiment show that the volcano spewed out lava far less often than previously thought, indicating that Mauna Loa and its neighbors on Hawaii may be more than twice as old as previously believed. The drill hole first pierced lavas from Mauna Loa and then passed into the Mauna Kea flows. The big island also contains three other volcanoes: the extinct Kohala; the historically active Hualalai; and the currently active Kilauea. Because the drilling results indicate that these volcanoes grew slowly, they suggest that four might have erupted during the same span of time, says Donald M. Thomas of the University of Hawaii in Honolulu. He collaborated on this project with Donald J. DePaolo of the University of California, Berkeley, and Edward M. Stolper of the California Institute of Technology in Pasadena. The big island's volcanoes and those on the other Hawaiian Islands formed as the Pacific plate passed over a vertical stream of hot rock rising from deep inside the planet. The ascending plume creates a volcano each time it burns a hole through the surface plate. But because the plate is moving, each volcano eventually dies out as it passes beyond the reach of this so-called hot spot. Then a new volcano develops over the spot. The youngest Hawaiian volcano, called Loihi, is slowly growing on the submerged flank of the island and will take many thousands of years to break the ocean surface. The research team drilled into the Hawaiian lava flows to learn more about the plume of hot rock that feeds the volcanoes. While some geophysicists believe these streams of rock rise from the edge of the Earth's core, others believe they start much shallower in the planet, within the upper section of the mantle. By studying details in the successive lava flows that erupted from Mauna Loa and Mauna Kea, scientists hope to learn more about where plumes originate and how they rise through the mantle, DePaoIo says. 

*
March 12, 1994 v145 n11 p164(1). 
Title: Deadly eruption yields prediction clues. (volcanic activity prediction) Author: Richard Monastersky 
Abstract: Volcanologists Stanley N. Williams and Tobias P. Fischer noticed a relationship between the amount of sulfur dioxide gas released prior to the Jan 14, 1994, and Mar 23, 1994, eruptions of Colombia's Galeras Volcano and a particular type of tremor. 
When volcanologist Stanley N. Williams visited Colombia's Galeras Volcano last year, he had no idea that burning chunks of rock would soon shoot from the crater, severely injuring him and killing nine people standing nearby. But from this tragedy. Williams and several colleagues have discovered geological clues that can help scientists foretell when pressures inside a volcano are reaching a critical level, according to research results they report this week. "If we could have recognized this pattern, there might have been a chance [last January] to say it was too dangerous to go into the volcano. But we hadn't seen this pattern before; says Tobias P. Fischer, a graduate student studying with Williams at Arizona State University in Tempe. Fischer, Williams, and their colleagues discuss their work in the March 10 NATURE. The volcanologists made their discovery by comparing earthquake behavior with the amount of sulfur dioxide gas that Galeras emitted prior to last year's Jan. 14 and March 23 eruptions. The researchers noticed a relationship between the gas releases and a particular type of tremor that has long-period seismic waves. According to theory. volcanoes produce these long-period quakes when pressurized gases flow through underground fractures, setting up vibrations much like the clanging in water pipes. Over the last decade, researchers have gradually come to realize that swarms of long-period tremors often herald an eruption. Indeed, such jolts shook Galeras before the fatal field trip last year, but the number of quakes was much lower than it had been, providing a false sense of security. "Basically, we were not worried at all about the volcano," Williams told SCIENCE NEWS. When Fischer examined data for last year, however, he observed that three distinct phases preceded the eruptions. In the first period, roughly 6 weeks before the blasts, Galeras began releasing more sulfur dioxide than usual, indicating that gases were flowing unimpeded to the surface. Researchers can measure such gases remotely with a spectrometer because sulfur dioxide blocks ultraviolet rays from the sun. In the second stage, a few weeks after the initial gas surge, emissions fell, while the energy of long-period quakes increased. These two trends suggest that fractures had started to close, reducing the gas leakage and increasing the pressure within the volcano. During the final phase, the energy of long-period tremors dropped, signaling that the fractures had sealed completely and that gas could no longer escape. The internal pressure increased until it blew out the rocks that plugged the inner crater. Volcanologists have monitored earthquakes and gas emissions at dangerous volcanoes for over a decade, but this study was the first to compare the two and decipher a distinct pattern, says Fischer. He suggests that researchers can better monitor the pressure within a volcano by tracking gases and seismicity. Scientists studying other eruptions are finding similar, although not identical, patterns. At Mt. Pinatubo in the Philippines, for example, sulfur dioxide emissions did drop before the June 1991 eruption, even as the energy of long-period quakes increased, according to Christopher Newhall of the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) in Seattle. But Alaska's Mr. Redoubt showed no gas changes prior to erupting in 1989, says Bernard A. Chouet of the USGS in Menlo Park, Calif. Although volcanologists may identify precursors of some eruptions, Chouet warns that they cannot bank on seeing the same changes before all blasts. "Every volcano is going to have its own personal behavior," he says. At Galeras, Williams and others intend to watch closely for any repeats of the past pattern. Although the recent eruptions there were minor, Williams worries that a much larger blast could occur. Almost 400,000 people live within 7 kilometers of the active crater, and their houses sit atop old volcanic flows. It was this danger that spurred researchers to gather there last year to discuss Galeras. 

*
May 28, 1994 v145 n22 p341(1). 
Title: Mount Rainier threatens with fire and ice. (Washington volcano) 
Author: Richard Monastersky 
Abstract: The National Research Council reports that scientists know too little about Mt. Rainier to prepare for an eruption or a partial collapse even though the volcano is considered to be the most dangerous in the Cascade region. 
Looming above the skylines of Seattle and Tacoma, Mount Rainier represents one of the greatest volcanic hazards in the United States. But scientists know too little about the mountain to prepare adequately for a future diaster, according to a report released this week by the National Research Council (NRC). "A major volcanic eruption or debris flow could kill thousands of residents and cripple the economy of the Pacific Northwest. Despite the potential for such danager, Mount Rainier has received little study," the report says. Rainier could cause problems even without erupting, says richard S. Fiske, a geologist at the Smithsonian Institution in Washington, D.C., who directed the study for the NCR. In the past, major sections of the mountain have simply collapsed, creating large avalanches and mudflows that swept through low-lying regions now home to 100,000 people. The U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) mapped the geology of Mount Rainier in the 1960s, and early 1970s. Since then, however, USGS has moved on to study other Cascade volcanoes, including Mount St. Helens, which erupted ccatastrophically in 1980. Most information on Mount Rainier therefore is out of date, says Carolyn L. Driedger of the survey's Cascade Volcano Observatory in VanCouver, Wash. Diredger, who has studied the record of mudflows -- or lahars -- at Mount Rainier, says USGS now consideres this volcano the most dangerous of the Cascade range, in part because the mountain has a thick mantle of snow and ice that can melt to from floods and lahars. The growing population along the base of the volcano compounds this threat. Volcanologists around the world have paid more heed to the danger of lahars since 1985, when a moderate eruption in Colombia triggered a mudflow that claimed 25,000 lives. From deposits to the northwest of Mount Rainier, geologists knew that this mountain spowned a lahar 5,00 years ago that carried 40 times the volume of the Colombia flow. The most recent giant lahar swept down off Rainier roughly 200 year ago; many small ones have occurred in recent decades. According to Fisk and his colleagues on the NRC committee, debris avalanches, lahars, and floods pose the most likley hazard at Mount Rainier. The mountain is prone to landslides because internal heat and glacial water have altered the original rock, turning it into relatively weak clay in places. The volcanic edifice could collapse during an eruption, during an earthquake, or perhaps without any obvious trigger. Fiske notes that nothing unusual is happening at Mount Rainier at the moment. "There's no unrest. We don't want to convey any sense of that. But there are actions that can be taken now before a disaster occurs," he says. The committee recommends that scientists adopt a multipronged appraoch, combining fundament l research, monitoring systems, and community education efforts, to reduce the hazard at Rainier. At other sites around the world, volcanologists have used a number of different techniques to keep tabs on a dangerous mountain, Seismometers can detect movement of magma below around or landslides on the surface. Researchers can use te Global positioning System to monitor changes in the volcano's surface. Stream sensors can detect floods or lahars hours before they reach population centers. But numerous past disasters, including the 1985 Colombian catastrophe, have taught experts that scientific information alone will not save lives. Researchers must work with social scientists, civil authorities, and the general population to prepare for the inevitable upheaval at Mount Rainier, says Fiske. 

*
August 13, 1994 v146 n7 p101(1). 
Title: Dante conquers the crater, then stumbles. 
Author: Richard Monastersky 
Abstract: The eight-legged explorer robot Dante 2 flipped over while climbing out of a crater of Alaska's active volcano, Mt. Spurr. Despite the fall, engineers reported that Dante 2 exceeded their expectations. It spent 8 days in the crater testing for sulfur compounds in the volcanic gases. 
The robot explorer Dante 2 discovered last week that the road home is often the roughest. After spending 8 days successfully navigating the steaming crater of Alaska's Mt. Spurr and enduring attacks by falling boudlers, the spiderlike machine flipped over while climbing out. The Dante crew will attempt to airlift the helpless robot this week. Despite the late setback, engineers connected with the mission say Dante performed beyond expectations in a harsh environment. "From the science and technology side, it's a clear victory and a success," says William "Red" Whittaker, a principal investigator on the project and a robotics researcher at Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh. The eight-legged robot descended 660 feet into the crater of the active volcano, analyzed gases escaping from several fumeroles, and collected terrain information for mapping the interior. For parts of the trip, the robot controlled its own movement by sensing the environment, picking a route, and planning where to place its feet. At other times, the Dante team controlled aspects of the robot's walking from a command center 80 miles away in Anchorage and from NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, Calif. Dante was connected by a tether to an electric generator and a satellite dish on the rim of the crater. During the first part of its trek, the robot descended snowcovered slopes of 20[degress] to 30[degress]; it later encountered bare rock, mud, and fields of large boulders. At certain points, the 10-foot-long, 10-foot-high robot climbed over rocks larger than itself. Mt. Spurr erupted in 1992 and let loose smaller blasts in 1993. But even more than the threat of eruption, the primary danger inside the crater came from falling rocks. As the walker neared the crater floor, its video cameras showed several refrigerator-size boulders bounce close by. A 1-foot-diameter rock knocked one of the legs out from under Dante but did not cause major damage. While in the crater, the explorer used onboard analyzers to test for sulfur compounds in the volcanic gases. Those tests did not detect hydrogen sulfide or sulfur dioxide, which suggests that no fresh magma lies at a shallow depth beneath the volcano waiting to erupt. The robot had climbed about one-third of the way out of the crater when it rolled over while crossing a 35[degress] slope and could not right itself. "We were just on terrain beyond our capability," explains Project Manager John E. Bares. Dante 2 evolved out of a walking robot that Whittaker's team took to Antarctica's Mount Erebus in late 1992. This earlier version descended only 20 feet into the crater before broken connections in its tether ended the mission (SN: 1/9/93, p.22). The Dante 2 project pushed the bounds of robotics by exposing a walking machine to a range of demanding conditions never before experienced. "It sets the state of the art in walking on rough terrain. It's a pretty impressive accomplishment," says Roger D. Quinn, who designs walking robots at Case Western Reserve University in Cleveland. NASA, which funded the mission, is encouraging the development of autonomous robots for planetary exploration. "The moon is the place for the fulfillment of this work," says Whittaker. 

*
Oct 8, 1994 v146 n15 p228(1). 
Title: When there's smoke.... (Papua New Guinea's Rabaul volcano erupted September 19, 1994) (Brief Article) 
Author: Richard Monastersky 
The Rabaul volcano in Papua New Guinea erupted Sept. 19, shooting ash and gases at least 70,000 feet into the atmosphere. A National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration polar-orbiting satellite took this image of the ash plume, spreading out into a fan shape as it traveled downwind from Rabaul. The volcano lies on the northeastern end of New Britain Island, forming a 10-kilometer-wide harbor with its sunken crater. Rabaul started grumbling on Sept. 18, giving the 30,000 residents at the northern end of the harbor enough time to evacuate before the eruption began the next day at two cones on opposite ends of the harbor (SN: 10/1/94, p.213). Five hundred people perished the last time both cones erupted, in 1937. The recent eruptions have blanketed the city of Rabaul with more than a foot of ash. Rains have waterlogged the debris, causing many roofs to collapse. United Nations representatives report that four people have died. In the last week, the activity at the cone named Vulcan appears to have died out, while the Tavurvur cone continues to erupt at a low level, according to Daniel Dzurisin of the U.S. Geological Survey's Cascades Volcano Observatory (CVO) in Vancouver, Wash. A team from CVO arrived at Rabaul on Oct. 1 with equipment to monitor the activity there. The volcano has hosted several giant eruptions in the last few thousand years, raising concern that the recent activity could be leading toward something much larger. 

*
Oct 15, 1994 v146 n16 p247(1). 
Title: Shuttle radar views erupting volcano. (space shuttle Endeavor's image of the Kliuchevskoi volcano on Russia's Kamchatka Peninsula) 
Author: Tina Adler 
Radar aboard the U.S. space shuttle Endeavour captured this-false-color image of the Kliuchevskoi volcano in full eruption just 1 day after it roared to life Sept. 30 on Russia's isolated Kamchatka Peninsula. Kliuchevskoi, the white peak surrounded by red (lower left), overlooks the Kamchatka River, which runs like a black squiggle across the image. The green, wrinkly mound (upper right) is a dormant volcano. The area pictured covers about 18 miles by 37 miles. One of the most active volcanic zones in the world, the region sits on the boundary between two colliding continental plates. The yellowish green lines on the flanks of Kliuchevskoi denote lava flows, and they look surprisingly distinct, says David C. Pieri of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, Calif. "There's something different about those flows...it bears looking into," he says. Kliuchevskoi shot gas, vapor, and ash 65,000 feet into the air. Heat from the eruption melted snow that triggered mud slides, which may threaten homes to the north. Geoscientists find radar imaging techniques particularly useful for studying erupting volcanoes because they can penetrate clouds and show a volcano's topography clearly, says Pieri. However, the images do not reveal the plume or the heat coming from the volcano.

*
June 7, 1997 n40 p350(1). 
Title: Mud volcano stews in chilly Arctic waters. (underwater 1,250-meter-deep volcano emits an icy coating of snowlike natural gas which supports such life as tube worms without who have no mouths or digestive systems)
Author: Richard Monastersky 
A team of U.S., Norwegian, and Russian scientists has found an unusual layer of snowlike natural gas draped across a warm mud volcano--the deep-sea equivalent of apple pie a la mode. Oceanographers have never before witnessed this contrast of an icy coating on top of a seething underwater volcano. Researchers from the Naval Research Laboratory (NRL) in Washington, D.C., and their Norwegian colleagues discovered the 1,250-meter-deep mud volcano in 1995, while conducting a sonar study between Norway and the island of Spitsbergen. Unlike more familiar volcanoes, which eject rock and ash, mud volcanoes spew out a slurry of seafloor sediments mixed with water. The scientists named the 1-kilometer-wide circular feature the Hakon Mosby mud volcano, after the Norwegian research vessel used in the expedition. Last year, the oceanographic team returned on a Russian ship with cameras and instruments to probe the seafloor. The scientists presented their findings last week at a meeting of the American Geophysical Union in Baltimore. Pictures of the mud volcano show a white substance, believed to be methane hydrate, covering the seafloor like freshly fallen snow. Methane hydrate is a solid that forms when high pressures and low temperatures squeeze water molecules into a crystalline cage around a methane molecule. Cores drilled into the sediments beneath the surface of the mud volcano contained radish-size clumps of hydrates, which fizzled and evaporated quickly when brought to the ship. Methane hydrates are capturing increasing attention, in part because they represent the largest untapped source of fossil fuels left on Earth (SN: 11/9/96, p. 298). Oceanographers suspect that methane hydrates hide in vast subseafloor deposits around the continents, but it is extremely rare to find the icy substance sitting on the ocean floor, says Peter R. Vogt of NRL, one of the scientists leading last year's expedition. Methane seeping up from the mud volcano supports a rich community of organisms, including a new species of tiny tube worms, report the Russian scientists on the team. Members of the animal phylum Pogonophora, tube worms have neither mouths nor digestive tracts. They get their energy from symbiotic bacteria, which live inside the worms and oxidize methane. Mud volcanoes exist in many places around the world, but the Hakon Mosby is unusual, says Vogt. Unlike most other such volcanoes, which develop above rising blobs of salt or near ocean trenches, the Hakon Mosby has no clear geologic feature forcing the mud to erupt at the surface. The team of researchers is planning another expedition in 1998, during which they will dive to the volcano inside two Russian submersibles. As ocean temperatures warm in the next century, shallow deposits of methane hydrates could melt and destabilize sediments on the continental slopes. If the seafloor gives way, massive submarine landslides would trigger giant waves that would inundate coastal communities. "The consequences of hydrate decomposition in the not-too-distant future are going to be a problem for society," says Peter G. Brewer of the Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute in Moss Landing, Calif. Sites like the Hakon Mosby mud volcano allow scientists to Study flow hydrates form and decompose in their natural environment, he says. 

*
April 8, 1995 v147 n14 p216(3). 
Title: When Kilauea crumbles: Hawaii trembles as a mountain slowly collapses. (mountain beneath Kilauea volcano is sliding toward the ocean; includes related article on lava flow) 
Author: Richard Monastersky 
Abstract: The mountain is moving at a rate of 10 centimeters a year, which is fast by geologic standards. Researchers are concerned that the shift could cause a major earthquake. A model for explaining how the mountain is being torn apart is explained. 
From the smell of seared rubber, geologist Carl Thornber knew his boots had caught fire again. It upset him, not because he feared for his feet, but because his new shoes had failed to live up to expectations. This was only their maiden trek onto the lava flows seeping out of Hawaii's Kilauea volcano. At this rate, the boots wouldn't last the month. Thornber's truck might not either. His employer, the Hawaiian Volcano Observatory, acquired the aging vehicle from Clark Air Force Base in the Philippines, which evacuated in 1991 just before nearby Mount Pinatubo erupted. Although the truck, dubbed "the Battlewagon" for its camouflage colors, escaped death by volcano then, Kilauea (pronounced "kill-a-way-a") is finishing the job. Like the boots and the Battlewagon, Kilauea volcano itself is falling apart. Even as geologists map its surface lava flows, the mountain beneath them is tearing away from the rest of the island of Hawaii and sliding toward the ocean at 10 centimeters a year, a sprint by geologic standards. This is the fastest-moving parcel of real estate on Earth. That fact unsettles researchers at the volcano observatory, a U.S. Geological Survey facility perched next to Kilauea's summit crater. A look at bathymetric charts tacked up inside the observatory explains the scientists' concern. The maps reveal that the seafloor around the Hawaiian Islands is littered with debris from landslides of mythic proportions. Gigantic slices of volcanoes have broken off the islands in millennia past and skidded across the ocean bottom, splintering into smaller blocks that finally ground to a halt as much as 200 kilometers from their starting point. One stranded fragment rivals Manhattan in size. Another avalanche triggered a tsunami that reached as high as the Empire State Building. No one knows whether the southern section of Kilauea will take a dive anytime soon. But scientists say that even minor shifts of the mountain's mass can cause damaging earthquakes, which may represent a greater hazard to the island than the much more obvious threat from lava flows. To illustrate Kilauea's current wounds, geophysicist Roger Denlinger scrambles down a fissure big enough to swallow a bus. The crack has opened as land to the south edges seaward, pulling away from the rest of the island. Denlinger hails originally from the mainland. But like the other USGS scientists, he came to the Hawaiian Volcano Observatory for the chance to study a mountain in action. The facility serves as a training ground for volcanologists from around the world. To explain the processes tearing apart Kilauea, Denlinger and his colleagues have constructed a basic theoretical model of the volcano. The model consists of two main elements, a magma reservoir a few kilometers beneath the volcano's summit and a fault under the mountain's south flank. Resembling a flexible bladder, the reservoir expands when molten rock fills it from below. "It seems the same basic model from other volcanoes applies here," says Denlinger. "You have a magma system that inflates like a balloon and pushes on the flank. The flank detaches along a basal fault and destabilizes and forms a big landslide. That's what happened at St. Helens in 1980 and it's happening here now and we're studying the process." The Mount St. Helens eruption taught volcanologists a deadly lesson about landslides. Although USGS researchers in early 1980 predicted the upcoming blast, they failed to anticipate that it would start with a rock avalanche. Scientists monitoring St. Helens expected a vertical eruption. But when the mountain's northern slope collapsed, the landslide triggered a sideways explosion that swept away geologist David Johnston, stationed 9 km to the north. Since then, researchers have recognized that many volcanoes have a habit of falling apart, including those on Hawaii. At Kilauea, observatory scientists have used recent earthquakes to map the hidden fault threatening to shear the volcano. Many tremors originate about 9 km below the surface, on a plane interpreted to be a nearly horizontal fault. This flat structure separates the upper part of Kilauea from the seafloor foundation on which the volcano has built itself over the last 100,000 years. Land seaward of Kilauea's summit -- a region called the south flank -- slides south along the basal fault like a wooden wedge being pushed across a table. Denlinger works with colleagues at the volcano observatory and at Stanford University to monitor the flank's movement using the Global Positioning System (GPS). By regularly measuring the position of benchmarks around the volcano, they find that spots between the summit and coast creep quietly and continuously toward the ocean. The land moves as much as 10 cm per year at the surface and up to 20 cm per year at the depth of the fault. That's about four times the slip rate along California's infamous San Andreas fault, the scientists report in the March 3 Science. Not all portions of the flank cruise along so smoothly, however. From GPS measurements, researchers know that the coast moves at only three-quarters of the speed of locations inland. Beyond the coast, submerged parts of the flank appear even less mobile. Bathymetric profiles of this region show a raised bench offshore that may result from land piling up behind a stuck portion of Kilauea's outer flank. "It's like a bulldozer pushing on a pile of debris or a shovel pushing on snow," Denlinger says. "If you push on snow, it will pile up right in front of the blade. It works that way here. The resistance is right at the end of the flank's toe. Basically, this material is piling up as the flank is being pushed seaward." In fact, the GPS measurements show the coastline currently bulging upward because lower reaches of the flank remain stuck. The pushing match can't continue forever, though. As the volcano's southern edge buckles, it stores up strain energy like a compressed spring. Squeeze the flank too much and it will eventually break free. Denlinger and his colleagues are now struggling to understand what forces control the flank's behavior, allowing some parts to move continuously while other parts stick. "The big question is, at what point do we go from just having a portion of the fault slip to having a catastrophic event that causes the entire base to decouple from the island," he wonders. Judging from recent events, Kilauea's south side appears sensitively poised. In early 1994, researchers noticed that the flank stopped moving after pressure in the magma reservoir dropped slightly. When the pressure increased again in March 1994, the flank resumed sliding. "One of the things that's really scary about what happened last year is that the apparent pressure change that caused the flank to stop was small," says Denlinger. "So you have a fairly large piece of real estate that started and stopped and started again with very small changes in pressure. That means it has to be pretty delicately balanced and fairly slippery along the base." When the flank eventually gives way, Hawaii will certainly not suffer alone. "The risk is very, very large because the tsunami that would be generated would be a Pacific-wide tsunami. It will hit every coastal city on the entire Pacific Rim," says David A. Clague, scientist-in-charge at the volcano observatory. To give a sense of the expected wave, Clague points out the tiny island of Lanai on a nearby map of the Hawaiian archipelago. One mountain on Lanai has fragments of coral sitting at an elevation of 365 meters above sea level -- an unusual spot for an ocean- dwelling creature. Clague explains that the coral reached this height because of a giant tsunami, triggered by a landslide off the west coast of Hawaii. Just how likely is one of these landslides? While scientists can't say for sure, they think that time is on their side. From the number of debris piles sitting on the seafloor, researchers calculate that giant sections of Hawaiian volcanoes peel off only once every 100,000 to 200,000 years. Chances are extremely slim, therefore, that one will occur during the next decade or even the next millennium. But while landslides might not represent a major hazard in their own right, Clague believes that they illuminate a much greater threat to life on the islands: earthquakes. Almost all of the large tremors on the island emanate from the flat fault underneath Kilauea and similar faults beneath Mauna Loa, the same geologic structures that can give way and cause landslides. "We're trying to understand how the volcano works. I think the landslides explain the mechanism behind the biggest earthquakes that occur here," Clague says. "They point out that those earthquakes are not flukes, that they are part of the regular history of the volcano. During anyone's lifetime [on Hawaii], they will almost certainly experience at least one large earthquake, actually more than one. We don't know enough about the earthquake mechanisms here on Hawaii, and the landslides are a key to understanding that." Although most people do not view Hawaii as a seismic center, its earthquake record over the last 150 years actually rivals that of Southern California. On Nov. 29, 1975, a large patch of the south flank suddenly lurched seaward, generating a magnitude 7.2 earthquake -- a tremor bigger than the one that hit Kobe, Japan, earlier this year. In 1868, Kilauea's south flank and parts of Mauna Loa slipped on the basal fault under the two volcanoes, causing damage across the entire island, even as far away as Honolulu. Scientists estimate this earthquake at magnitude 8.0. Meanwhile, strong earthquakes of magnitude 6.0 strike every 6 years or so. The 1975 jolt caused significant damage but only two deaths, largely because few people lived nearby. Since then, development on the southern and eastern sides of Hawaii has brought tens of thousands of people closer to the earthquake region. The city of Hilo, only 40 km away, has swelled since 1980 to a population of 60,000. Some of Hilo's new construction has sprouted directly atop thick ash deposits from Mauna Kea volcano, which tend to amplify ground shaking during earthquakes. Scientists have seen evidence of enhanced vibrations in Hilo even during the small earthquakes that commonly jiggle the south flank. "We get reports of damage from Hilo -- pictures falling off walls and glass figurines tumbling off shelves -- from earthquakes out here as small as magnitude 3.2, which usually are right at the threshold that people can feel," Clague says. Kilauea's earthquakes are doubly dangerous because they generate tsunamis. When the south flank jumps forward, its submerged portions displace ocean water, sending destructive waves heading out toward other parts of the Hawaiian islands and potentially the entire Pacific Rim. "The biggest [likely] risk associated with the volcano would be an earthquake that would cause a tsunami that would obviously cause death and destruction," says Harry Kim, head of the Civil Defense Agency on the island of Hawaii. "That is such a concern because this office will not be able to get advance warning to anyone [on the island]; the sequence of events would be very similar to what occurred in 1975." During that tremor, a tsunami lashed the south coast almost immediately, killing two boy scouts camped with their troop along the water at Halape. Within 12 minutes, the tsunami hit Hilo, causing damage to boats and piers but no other deaths. The 1868 quake generated even larger waves that broke over the tops of palm trees along the south coast, according to eyewitness accounts from the time. "Halape [in 1975] could be looked at as a forerunner of even bigger events of a similar nature," Kim says. "We as mankind must remember that the huge earthquake of 1868, which caused a huge tsunami, is a very real threat to this island." Knowing that earthquakes and tsunamis will eventually strike, Kim and scientists at the volcano observatory have battled to inform Hawaiians about the hazards they face. Last year, they convinced the county to strengthen contruction codes to reduce damage during the next earthquake. Kilauea has helped in its own way by doing some natural rezoning. In the early 1970s, developers planned to put a major resort along Kilauea's south flank. In preparation for golf courses, teahouses, hotels, and housing subdivisions, the state constructed roads and laid utility lines heading south out of the town of Pahoa. But the 1975 earthquake, which dropped the coastline by almost 3 m, upended the resort plans. Despite the warning, a housing development blossomed in the 1980s on the south flank in a region called Kalapana. The Hawaiian goddess of fire, Pele, took care of Kalapana. Lava from Kilauea paved over the subdivision in 1990, destroying its homes but killing no one. In this way, the volcano's growing pains have effectively banished all people from the highest-risk seismic zone. "Nature -- others would say Pele -- has solved a problem for us by removing the concentration of people," says Kim. "So even if we had the worst-case scenario, the death and destruction would be very limited compared to what it would have been." RELATED ARTICLE: The Enduring Eruption Lava oozes out of a gash in the ground with the consistency of molten mozzarella. Glowing bright orange, the 1,100 degree C blob advances a few centimeters and then hardens into a glassy gray mass. Instant rock, only seconds old. In terms of drama, the lava flows currently issuing from Kilauea volcano can't compare to the explosive blasts served up by Mount Pinatubo or Mount St. Helens. But while these better-known volcanoes flashed briefly, hard-working Kilauea has poured out lava almost continuously for more than 12 years. Still going strong, this eruption is the longest known on Earth. Since Jan. 3, 1983, Kilauea has quietly pumped out roughly 1.3 cubic kilometers of rock, more than the volume of the 1980 blast at Mount St. Helens. The eruption has destroyed 181 homes and a new visitor's center at Hawaii Volcanoes National Park. Losses now total $61 million. The lava flows have claimed no lives directly, but several sightseers died by venturing past warning signs into unsafe areas. Usually peaceful, Kilauea does have the potential to erupt explosively. In 1790, a major blast killed a troop of Hawaiian soldiers who were marching across the island to fight King Kamehameha. Aided by Kilauea, the famous chief went on to conquer all the Hawaiian Islands. 

*
August 26, 1995 v148 n9 p134(1). 
Title: Smothered pine trees reveal unseen killer. (elevated carbon dioxide levels released from the Mammoth Mountain, CA, volcano were responsible for the deaths of a band of trees)(Brief Article) 
Author: Richard Monastersky 
Nobody could understand why trees were dying in California's Inyo National Forest. When stands of lodgepole pine, hemlock and Western white pine started turning a pallid gray in 1990, rangers first focused on the obvious suspects: disease, pests, and the ongoing drought. But none of these factors could explain the dead zones growing in cancerous patches around Mammoth Mountain, a restless volcano in the eastern Sierra Nevada. Another curious fact: Since 1990, several people had experienced bouts of dizziness, nausea, and even convulsions after entering small cabins and other confined spaces on the mountain. Geologist Christopher D. Farrar solved the double mystery by measuring gases in the soil around Mammoth Mountain over the last year. The soil beneath the dead trees contains toxic amounts of carbon dioxide gas, which is seeping out of faults on the side of the volcano, Farrar and his colleagues report in the Aug. 24 Nature. Carbon dioxide made up an average of 30 to 90 percent of all the gases in soil beneath the 30 hectare region of dead trees, whereas under healthy trees that proportion did not exceed 1.5 percent, says Farrar, a researcher with the U.S. Geological Survey in Carnelian Bay, Calif. By analyzing the ratio of different carbon isotopes, the researchers established that the gas had bubbled out of magma within the volcano. The elevated carbon dioxide abundance can also explain why people suffered strange symptoms when entering confined cabins, says Farrar. As the gas seeps out of the soil, it gets trapped in any unventilated structure. Farrar measured carbon dioxide concentrations of 25 percent in a small cabin and 89 percent in an underground utility vault--both amounts that could quickly kill a person. He also measured concentrations above 1 percent in campsite lavatories and small tents--levels far from lethal but still in excess of U.S. health standards for occupational safety. The Forest Service closed a popular campsite near Horseshoe Lake this summer because of the elevated gas levels and also because of the threat posed by standing dead trees. The campsite will reopen in a few weeks, says Thomas Heller of the Mammoth Ranger Station in Mammoth Lakes, Calif. Mammoth Mountain, a popular ski and summer recreation spot, attracts 3.5 million visitors a year. The carbon dioxide provides a reminder that hot magma sits beneath Mammoth Mountain, comments volcanologist Stanley N. Williams of Arizona State University in Tempe. The mountain could experience repeats of the small steam explosions that last blasted out craters roughly 500 years ago. "Seeing a large amount of carbon dioxide coming out in a geologically sudden event gives us a reason to at least start paying more attention to the so-called dormant volcano and make sure there aren't other indications that are suggesting it's ready to go into a new phase of activity," says Farrar. Volcanologists are also concerned about the potential for a truly gigantic eruption in the area. Mammoth Mountain sits on the edge of a large volcanic crater known as the Long Valley Caldera, which scientists are closely monitoring for signs of unrest. 

*
July 26, 1997 v152 n4 p60(1). 
Title: Volcano dumps ash on Mexico City. (Popocatepetl volcano erupts)(Earth Science) 
Author: Richard Monastersky 
A restless Mexican volcano roared to life early this month with its largest eruption in more than 50 years, sending ash raining down on the 22 million people living in and around Mexico City. A layer of gritty debris coated the capital area and forced the temporary shutdown of the international airport there. "It was a small amount of ashfall, but many people were very surprised because they had never seen it before," says Servando de la Cruz-Reyna, a volcanologist at the National Center for Disaster Prevention in Mexico City. The volcano, called Popocatepetl, or El Popo for short, sits 60 kilometers southeast of the Mexican capital. Since 1994, the 5,465-meter-tall mountain has produced a series of small eruptions, none of which has caused serious damage. A major eruption would threaten 100,000 people living within roughly 10 km of the volcano. To forecast such an event, scientists are monitoring El Popo 24 hours a day with I I automatic seismic stations and three tiltmeters. Crews regularly measure the mountain's deformation, the chemistry of ash and water, and the gases billowing from the top. Their instruments gave hints of the recent minor eruption several days in advance, says de la Cruz-Reyna. 

*
Dec 20, 1997 v152 n25-26 p396(1). 
Title: California volcano starts to stir.(earthquakes generated by volcanic site in Long Lake caldera in eastern California) 
Author: Richard Monastersky 
Soon after the debut of Dante's Peak, a fictional film chronicling a volcanic eruption in the Pacific Northwest, nature provided some unanticipated publicity for the movie. This summer, a real volcanic site in eastern California began generating many earthquakes even as instruments picked up signs that the ground there was expanding. Since then, the region has spawned a handful of house-rattling jolts and 8,000 small tremors above magnitude 1.2, reports David P. Hill of the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) in Menlo Park, Calif. The seismic activity, called a quake swarm, remained relatively minor through the spring and summer but took off in October, culminating with three jolts approaching magnitude 5 in late November. The earthquakes have centered on the southwest side of the Long Valley caldera, a 30-kilometer-long oval depression on the eastern flank of the Sierra Nevada. Overlapping the ski town of Mammoth Lakes, Calif., the caldera formed 760,000 years ago when an eruption of magma caused the crust to drop by 2 km. Over this year, instruments have detected the ground inside the caldera warping upward by 5 centimeters, a dramatic jump over the gradual deformation seen in the last few years. The dome-shaped region has risen 70 cm since 1980. Geoscientists have been monitoring the seismic unrest and ground movement closely, looking for signs that magma is squeezing up through the crust toward the surface, perhaps portending an eruption. So far, no clear evidence of magma movement has emerged, and the USGS assessment of eruption risk remains on the lowest level of a four-tier alert system. Scientists at USGS have seen even stronger quake activity at Long Valley twice before, in 1980 and 1983, without any eruptions. In 1982, the agency prepared a notice of potential volcanic hazard that alienated many residents of Mammoth Lakes and turned into a public relations fiasco. Since then, there have been occasional smaller quake swarms and quiet intervals. "These can go on for decades or centuries without an eruption. What we have to do is keep watch," says Hill. 

*
Feb 28, 1998 v153 n9 p133(1). 
Title: Signs of eruption found off Oregon shores. (oceanographers detect recent eruption of the undersea Axial volcano) 
Author: R. Monastersky 
Braving winter seas whipped to a fury by El Nino-powered storms, a crew of oceanographers visited a submerged volcano this month and pulled up evidence of a recent eruption some 500 kilometers west of the Oregon coast. "We were very fortunate to get anything," says Robert W. Embley of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) in Newport, Ore. The wind and waves were rough enough to break a plug in the ship's hull, allowing water to pour in and ruin two computers. The research vessel Wecoma set off on Feb. 9 for Axial volcano, a broad-shouldered mountain whose summit rises to within 1,350 meters of the ocean surface. Axial has captured the attention of marine scientists over the last few years because it appears to be active and it sits directly atop a section of the midocean ridge system. Along the length of this 65,000-km chain girdling the globe, the seafloor spreads apart to form new ocean crust. Arriving at the volcano, the researchers discovered a dramatic increase in the amount of warm water spewing out of the summit depression, called a caldera. They also found microscopic shards of glassy rock in the fluids, suggesting that fresh molten rock had forced its way up through the crust and erupted on the seafloor within the last month. The team could not collect proof of an eruption because Wecoma lacks equipment to image the seafloor. Researchers at NOAA first detected hints of the recent activity at Axial volcano on Jan. 25, when an underwater network of microphones picked up a flurry of earthquakes coming from the caldera. The earthquake swarm continued for more than a week, sometimes spawning more than 100 quakes per hour. The majority ranged in size between magnitude 2 and 3, although three quakes exceeded magnitude 4, says Christopher Fox of NOAA. This is the third time marine scientists have detected quake swarms on the underwater sound surveillance system. The NOAA team observed swarms in 1993 north of Axial and then in 1996 southeast of the volcano. In both previous cases, researchers quickly visited the sites and documented recent eruptions. The event at Axial volcano will yield more detailed information than the previous eruptions because scientists have been collecting baseline data at the volcano and can therefore evaluate how it has changed, says Edward T. Baker of NOAA in Seattle, a chief scientist on the Wecoma. Last summer, Baker and his colleagues tethered instruments to the seafloor on top of Axial volcano. If the devices have survived the eruption, they will provide data about water currents and temperature, earthquakes, and seafloor tilting and spreading. The researchers will return to the volcano this summer with underwater cameras to image the ocean bottom and to collect the sensors. "That's going to be a crushing blow if we have all these instruments there and they turned out to be too close [to the eruption]," says Baker. Although Axial forms part of the global midocean ridge, most other ridge segments do not form broad, high volcanoes, says Rachel M. Haymon, a marine geologist at the University of California, Santa Barbara. Nonetheless, the activity at Axial can help scientists learn lessons about the eruptions creating new crust along the ridge system. "It's so hard to document what is going on down there. To have some evidence of it is important," she says. 

*
Oct 31, 1998 p279(1). 
Title: Big shocks push volcanoes over the edge.(scientists look or correlation between earthquakes and volcano eruptions) 
Author: S. Simpson 
Earthquakes and volcanoes are alike in at least one way: They cluster along the margins where tectonic plates grate against each other as they move across the planet. Yet scientists have had little evidence that one earth-shaking event can trigger the other. Now, Alan T. Linde and I. Selwyn Sacks of the Carnegie Institution of Washington (D.C.) say that some of the world's most powerful quakes seem to set off volcanic eruptions. A handful of researchers previously have tried to link individual shocks and eruptions, but "you could never be sure they weren't just coincidences," Linde says. There is one link between a quake and a volcano that everyone agrees was no coincidence, and it caught Linde's eye. In 1992, a magnitude 7.5 earthquake near Landers, Calif., triggered knots of activity far away. It set off rumbling under Long Valley, a collapsed volcano 400 kilometers to the north. The valley shuddered hundreds of times a day. What's more, sensitive instruments detected swelling of the pool of magma stewing below the surface. Long Valley did not erupt, but a question burned in Linde's mind. "Suppose the Long Valley system had been poised, just ready to go," he says. "Could this type of thing be the trigger that tips it over the edge?" To see whether past earthquakes had ever pushed volcanoes over the brink, Linde and Sacks scoured global records dating back as far as the 1500s. They chose earthquakes greater than magnitude 7.0 and volcanoes for which the eruption start date was known. The geophysicists reported in the Oct. 29 Nature that 8 of the study's 204 earthquakes of magnitude 8.0 or greater seemed to trigger same-day eruptions within 750 km. Altogether, 11 volcanoes blew their tops on the same day as these big quakes, but only 5 or fewer erupted on any of the 1,000 days before or after. "If that's not just a fluke, it means earthquakes can cause things to happen at a distance where the shaking can't even be felt," says David D. Jackson of the University of California, Los Angeles. To test the strength of the finding, Linde and Sacks randomly selected dates before or after each of the earthquakes and then recorded the number of eruptions on these dates. In 100,000 trials, only once did even eight eruptions cluster on one of the random dates. The chance of coincidentally having 11 eruptions, as in the historical data, is "terribly, terribly teeny," Linde says. Jackson points out that the study's parameters limited the possible outcomes. If they had chosen a hypothesis that included different magnitude cutoffs or different time intervals, he says, the results might have been different. Even Linde says that scientists won't be using earthquakes to predict eruptions any time soon. "You need a coincidence of physics," Linde says. "[The volcano] must be sitting and waiting to erupt for the earthquake to trigger anything." Although a triggering effect is rare, "this is another tool for looking into how volcanoes prepare for eruption," Linde says. "The more you know about the physics of the volcanic system, the better you can tell what's going on." Eruptions aren't the whole story, he adds. "There are probably a lot more like the Long Valley case, where the earthquake goes off and there's no eruption, but there is some flurry of activity at the volcano." Few volcanoes, however, are monitored well enough to detect the kind of small changes seen in Long Valley's magma chamber. Such monitoring is bound to catch on, Linde says. "Just a couple of weeks ago, we put our first strainmeter on the slopes of Vesuvius, and we're hoping to get them on Etna and Mauna Loa as well." 

*
April 17, 1999 v155 i16 p245(1). 
Title: Nature fouls Mexico City's clean-air effort.(volcano polluting the air in Mexico)(Brief Article) 
Author: R. Monastersky 
Officials in Mexico City scrubbed away much of the region's sulfur pollution 7 years ago, but an industrious nearby volcano is undermining that effort by fuming the city with natural emissions, according to a team of Mexican and U.S. scientists. The volcano, called Popocatepetl or the Popo for short, stands 60 kilometers southeast of the mountain-ringed basin that holds Mexico City. During a 2-week period of measurements in November 1997, researchers detected signs that volcanic gases regularly drift down into the basin and mix with the legendary urban smog there, they report in the April 15 GEOPHYSICAL RESEARCH LETTERS. "You've got a huge urban area--some 20 million people--and you've got a fuming volcano that is impacting the population directly with sulfur dioxide," says Greg L. Kok of the National Center for Atmospheric Research in Boulder, Colo. "Mexico City is probably one of the dirtiest air-quality regions in the world from [human-generated] emissions, and you're adding to this natural emissions." Kok collaborated with study leader Graciela B. Raga of the National Autonomous University of Mexico in Mexico City and others in setting up a monitoring station in the southwest flank of the basin, 440 meters above the city. During the night and early morning, the site sits above the layer of urban pollution. By late morning, smoggy air rises up the mountainside and envelops the monitoring site. Raga and her colleagues detected occasional peaks in sulfur dioxide concentrations--at values roughly five to seven times the average--during the night when the mountain air held little human-generated pollution. The researchers concluded that the sulfur was coming from the volcano when winds blew the fumes toward the station and the city. Mexico City authorities tackled the human sources of sulfur dioxide in the early 1990s, when power plants abandoned high-sulfur fuel and the national oil company introduced low-sulfur diesel. In the atmosphere, sulfur dioxide readily reacts with water to form fine particles called aerosols, which scatter sunlight and produce a milky white haze common in many cities. The sulfur dioxide and sulfate-containing aerosols can cause respiratory problems by triggering asthma attacks and cases of bronchitis, says Douglas W. Dockery, an environmental epidemiologist at the Harvard School of Public Health in Boston. The peak sulfur dioxide concentrations reported by Raga's team, however, are relatively modest, falling below the U.S. standard, says Dockery. Emissions from the volcano only reach Mexico City when the winds blow in that direction, adds Mario Molina, an atmospheric chemist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology who grew up in Mexico City. Nonetheless, he says, "I think these are of concern in that whenever you get these emissions from the Popo drifting to the city, you get an additional stress on the population of the city." Scientists have yet to study cities closer to the volcano, where pollution presumably presents an even greater threat to human health. Raga and her colleagues plan to measure the sulfate aerosols and heavy metals that the Popo spews onto these cities. 

*
March 18, 2000 v157 i12 p191. 
Title: Undersea volcano: Heard but not seen. 
Author: T.H. 
Seismologists in Oregon have been eavesdropping on the rumblings of a mysterious submarine volcano since May 1998, but they haven't been able to locate the loudmouth. The scientists, from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), use a network of underwater microphones, or hydrophones, to listen to the ocean. Mainly for detecting earthquakes, the hydrophones can pick up whale calls and construction projects an ocean away, says seismologist Robert P. Dziak of NOAA and Oregon State University in Newport. The unseen volcano has a distinctive voice, he reports. Its soundprint is unusually regular. This initially led Dziak to think the sound might be human- or even whale-made. However, it was so loud and long-lasting that he concluded that the rumble resembles those from other active land and sea volcanoes. Dziak used data from hydrophones scattered around the Pacific to try to find the eruption's location. His calculations indicate that it lies about 1,000 kilometers south of Honshu Island, Japan, along the volcanically active Bonin trench. Unfortunately, the hydrophone network doesn't extend west of where the volcano appears to lie, making it impossible to triangulate the position. "We don't have the smoking gun, so to speak," says Dziak, but he hopes other researchers have data that could point him in the right direction. Two candidates for the mystery volcano--the submerged volcanoes Fukutoku-okanoba and Funka-asane--stand at the edge of the search area. Discolored seawater seen over the volcanoes could indicate eruptions, but the timing of water-color changes doesn't match the rumbling of the unknown volcano. Dziak reported his search for the growling volcano in the most recent issues (November and December 1999) of the BULLETIN OF THE GLOBAL VOLCANISM NETWORK. 

<#SCA>
*
March 12, 2001 
Moving Mountains. Volcanoes swell and collapse back down in what seem like great, heaving sighs. These movements may help scientists better predict eruptions.
By Naomi Lubick 
When Howard Zebker talks about volcanoes, he reminds his audience of the ones they might have drawn back in grade school: big cones on the flat surface of the earth, with chimneys in the middle to carry up magma from round puddles at the bottom called chambers. That abstract image is about right, he says, save for a few key differences: magma chambers aren't necessarily round, and they actually change shape. 
Zebker, an associate professor of geophysics and electrical engineering at Stanford University, and his colleagues know this because they have documented how volcanoes themselves change shape-slowly expanding at the surface and then collapsing back down in what seem like great, heaving sighs. Last December at the American Geophysical Union's annual fall meeting in San Francisco, Zebker and one of his graduate students presented their work on shape-shifting volcanoes in the Galápagos Island chain. 
Using data from the ERS-1 and ERS-2 satellites, both operated by the European Space Agency, the researchers collected images of the topography of several volcanoes over a 10-year period. By comparing the changes in elevation of the entire surfaces of these volcanoes, they were able to measure how they rose and fell over that time. Sometimes the magnitude of change Zebker and his colleagues observed amounted to only several centimeters, but at other times, the researchers found up to several meters of deformation. 
Though it's tempting to imagine, the volcanoes are not really breathing in any sense of the word. Instead, as hot rock enters and leaves a volcano's magma chamber, its walls shift. These changes, in turn, make the cold rock sitting on top-the actual cone of the volcano-rise and fall. But Zebker and his co-workers took their observations a step further, and used theoretical equations that describe the pressure of melted rock inside the volcanoes' magma chambers to determine the depth and the shape of the actual magma chambers. 
Instead of idealized spherical magma chambers, the scientists found different shapes, including "an oblong ellipsoidal kind of thing, that looks a little bit like an egg that's been squished down in the middle," Zebker said in a recent interview, surrounded by humming computers in his office. "What we're measuring, really, is the change in volume of the structure." The changing topography of the volcanoes further describes how their inner magma chambers expand and contract. 
Tracking these kinds of changes in a volcano's magma chamber could lead to better predictions of volcanic activity, the scientists say. According to the U.S. Geological Survey, there are about 550 historically active volcanoes on the earth, of which about 60 erupt each year. Volcanic activity can spawn earthquakes or result in the release of steam or other gases before an eruption even occurs. 
To create better predictions, however, scientists must first obtain more detailed and more frequent measurements of volcano metamorphoses. The ERS satellites used during the past decade traveled in orbits that brought them back to the same spot in the sky every 501 orbits. "What we acquired was a series of images, in principle, every 35 days over a seven- or eight-year period," Zebker explains. In fact, the radar equipment wasn't always turned on at the time the satellites flew over the Galápagos-for reasons of electrical load or priority given to other research teams using the satellites. 
Ten-day observations would be more useful for making predictions, says Peter Mouginis-Mark, chief scientist at the Maui Pacific Disaster Center, who also reviews Zebker's work. "The more frequent the observations, obviously the better time resolution one obtains," he says. Some changes-even surprisingly large shifts like the lava domes that preceded the 1983 Mount Saint Helens eruption-happen so quickly that the satellites would have missed them. 
Also, radar interferometry, the observational tool currently used, cannot "see" through vegetation, which may cover the side of a volcano. So for now, ground movement measurements are lost in those ecosystems. In order to improve their observations, Zebker and Paul Segal, also of Stanford University, proposed launching something like an array of dedicated satellites, with specific observational capabilities that could document movement more often and at smaller scales-and even monitor only certain types of materials. 
Researchers still do not fully understand the reasons behind the changing flow of magma in and out of magma chambers, causing volcanoes to go up and down, or to erupt. "We're not very good at predicting what it is yet," Zebker says, "and that's the focus of the research: to better characterize the processes so we can try and identify what's happening at any given time." 

RADAR INTERFEROMETRY. This technique uses synthetic aperture radar mapping satellites to form detailed images of geological surfaces-and to reveal centimeter-size changes in the earth's crust.

*
How do volcanoes affect world climate? 
B. McDonnell
Dublin, Ireland 
Answer posted on April 15, 2002
Karen Harpp, an assistant professor of geology at Colgate University, provides this explanation: 
In 1784, Benjamin Franklin made what may have been the first connection between volcanoes and global climate while stationed in Paris as the first diplomatic representative of the United States of America. He observed that during the summer of 1783, the climate was abnormally cold, both in Europe and back in the U.S. The ground froze early, the first snow stayed on the ground without melting, the winter was more severe than usual, and there seemed to be "a constant fog over all Europe, and [a] great part of North America." 
What Benjamin Franklin observed was indeed the result of volcanic activity. An enormous eruption of the Laki fissure system (a chain of volcanoes in which the lava erupts through a crack in the ground instead of from a single point) in Iceland caused the disruptions. The Laki eruptions produced about 14 cubic kilometers of basalt (thin, black, fluid lava) during more than eight months of activity. More importantly in terms of global climate, however, the Laki event also produced an ash cloud that may have reached up into the stratosphere. This cloud caused a dense haze across Europe that dimmed the sun, perhaps as far west as Siberia. In addition to ash, the eruptive cloud consisted primarily of vast quantities of sulfur dioxide (SO2), hydrogen chloride (HCl), and hydrogen fluoride gases (HF). The gases combined with water in the atmosphere to produce acid rain, destroying crops and killing livestock. The effects, of course, were most severe in Iceland; ultimately, more than 75 percent of Iceland's livestock and 25 percent of its human population died from famine or the toxic impact of the Laki eruption clouds. Consequences were also felt far beyond Iceland. Temperature data from the U.S. indicate that record lows occurred during the winter of 1783-1784. In fact, the temperature decreased about one degree Celsius in the Northern Hemisphere overall. That may not sound like much, but it had enormous effects in terms of food supplies and the survival of people across the Northern Hemisphere. For comparison, the global temperature of the most recent Ice Age was only about five degrees C below the current average. 
There are many reasons that large volcanic eruptions have such far-reaching effects on global climate. First, volcanic eruptions produce major quantities of carbon dioxide (CO2), a gas known to contribute to the greenhouse effect. Such greenhouse gases trap heat radiated off of the surface of the earth forming a type of insulation around the planet. The greenhouse effect is essential for our survival because it maintains the temperature of our planet within a habitable range. Nevertheless, there is growing concern that our production of gases such as CO2 from the burning of fossil fuels may be pushing the system a little too far, resulting in excessive warming on a global scale. There is no doubt that volcanic eruptions add CO2 to the atmosphere, but compared to the quantity produced by human activities, their impact is virtually trivial: volcanic eruptions produce about 110 million tons of CO2 each year, whereas human activities contribute almost 10,000 times that quantity. 
By far the more substantive climatic effect from volcanoes results from the production of atmospheric haze. Large eruption columns inject ash particles and sulfur-rich gases into the troposphere and stratosphere and these clouds can circle the globe within weeks of the volcanic activity. The small ash particles decrease the amount of sunlight reaching the surface of the earth and lower average global temperatures. The sulfurous gases combine with water in the atmosphere to form acidic aerosols that also absorb incoming solar radiation and scatter it back out into space. 
The ash and aerosol clouds from large volcanic eruptions spread quickly through the atmosphere. On August 26 and 27, 1883, the volcano Krakatau erupted in a catastrophic event that ejected about 20 cubic kilometers of material in an eruption column almost 40 kilometers high. Darkness immediately enveloped the neighboring Indonesian islands of Java and Sumatra. Fine particles, however, rode atmospheric currents westward. By the afternoon of August 28th, haze from the Krakatau eruption had reached South Africa and by September 9th it had circled the globe, only to do so several more times before settling out of the atmosphere. 
Initially, scientists believed that it was volcanoes' stratospheric ash clouds that had the dominant effect on global temperatures. The 1982 eruption of El Chichón in Mexico, however, altered that view. Only two years earlier, the major Mt. St. Helens eruption had lowered global temperatures by about 0.1 degree C. The much smaller eruption of El Chichón, in contrast, had three to five times the global cooling effect worldwide. Despite its smaller ash cloud, El Chichón emitted more than 40 times the volume of sulfur-rich gases produced by Mt. St. Helens, which revealed that the formation of atmospheric sulfur aerosols has a more substantial effect on global temperatures than simply the volume of ash produced during an eruption. Sulfate aerosols appear to take several years to settle out of the atmosphere, which is one of the reasons their effects are so widespread and long lasting. 
The atmospheric effects of volcanic eruptions were confirmed by the 1991 eruption of Mount Pinatubo, in the Philippines. Pinatubo's eruption cloud reached over 40 kilometers into the atmosphere and ejected about 17 million tons of SO2, just over two times that of El Chichón in 1982. The sulfur-rich aerosols circled the globe within three weeks and produced a global cooling effect approximately twice that of El Chichón. The Northern Hemisphere cooled by up to 0.6 degrees C during 1992 and 1993. Moreover, the aerosol particles may have contributed to an accelerated rate of ozone depletion during that same period. Interestingly, some scientists argue that without the cooling effect of major volcanic eruptions such as El Chichón and Mount Pinatubo, global warming effects caused by human activities would have been far more substantial. 
Major volcanic eruptions have additional climatic effects beyond global temperature decreases and acid rain. Ash and aerosol particles suspended in the atmosphere scatter light of red wavelengths, often resulting in brilliantly colored sunsets and sunrises around the world. The spectacular optical effects of the 1883 Krakatau eruption cloud were observed across the globe, and may have inspired numerous artists and writers in their work. The luminous, vibrant renderings of the fiery late day skyline above the Thames River in London by the British painter William Ascroft, for instance, may be the result of the distant Krakatau eruption. 
In 1815, the Indonesian volcano Tambora propelled more ash and volcanic gases into the atmosphere than any other eruption in history and resulted in significant atmospheric cooling on a global scale, much like Krakatau a few decades later. New England and Europe were particularly hard hit, with snowfalls as late as August and massive crop failures. The cold, wet, and unpleasant climatic effects of the eruption led 1816 to be known as "the year without a summer," and inspired Lord Byron to write: 
"The bright Sun was extinguish'd, and the stars 
Did wander darkling in the eternal space 
Rayless and pathless, and the icy earth 
Swung blind and blackening in the moonless air; 
Morn came and went-and came, 
And brought no day..." 
--Lord Byron, "Darkness"
There is a story that Byron invited some of his friends to his home in Switzerland that summer to relax by the shores of Lake Geneva. The lack of sun and warm summer weather led the group to hold a competition writing ghost stories to keep themselves entertained. One of the guests, Mary Shelley, wrote the famous novel Frankenstein for this contest, revealing that in addition to major climatic effects, volcanic eruptions can have some unexpectedly far-reaching results. 

VOLCANIC ERUPTIONS inject ash and aerosol clouds into the atmosphere and produce more than 100 million tons of carbon dioxide each year.

*
February 28, 2002
Silent Volcanic Quakes Could Portend Tsunamis
Nearly 15 months after the fact, scientists have discovered a magnitude-5.7 earthquake that occurred on Hawaii's Kilauea volcano. According to a report published today in the journal Nature, the 36-hour-long quake forced the southern flank of the volcano to slide nearly nine centimeters into the sea. Although no one felt it, such seemingly subtle quakes can potentially set in motion events leading to a tsunami. 
Peter Cervelli of Stanford University and his colleagues detected the aseismic earthquake using a network of global positioning system (GPS) stations strewn around the volcano on Hawaii's Big Island. "We call them silent earthquakes because the ground doesn't shake and they produce no seismic waves," co-author Paul Segall explains. As a result of the quake, a 2,000-cubic-kilometer section of the southeast side of the volcano moved seaward, achieving a maximum speed of six centimeters a day before coming to rest. When the side of the volcano doesn't halt in such circumstances and instead slips off into the ocean, a so-called flank collapse occurs. Because of the volume of rock involved, flank collapses can trigger tsunamis. "This event did not produce a tsunami," Segall says, "but if we can detect potentially catastrophic ground motion in its early stages, we might be able to issue tsunami warnings in the future." 
As the new findings indicate, GPS networks are capable of identifying silent quakes in areas not previously known to experience the events. Now that they know such movement is possible, the authors propose that the monitoring data could be analyzed in real time so that warnings could be issued in cases of sudden acceleration or potential instability. Writing in an accompanying commentary, Steven N. Ward of the University of California at Santa Cruz agrees, noting that the "world's oceanic volcanoes are stages best not left unwatched." He adds, however, that "people should not lose sleep over large but rare natural hazards." --Sarah Graham


*
July 06, 2000 
Rivers of Rock 
New ways of predicting the disastrous flows of volcanic ash known as lahars 
By Sarah Simpson 
Volcanologist Peter J. Mouginis-Mark nestled a cooking pot filled with cool water into a shallow trench outside his tent. Then he rinsed his hands in a nearby stream that almost scalded his fingers. Half an hour later the water in the pot, too, was hot to the touch. 
Had Mouginis-Mark not expected to camp on a colossal bed of volcanic ash, his sizzling surroundings might have sent him fleeing for home. But last November he and four companions from the University of Hawaii hiked up the steep western flank of the Philippines' Mount Pinatubo to explore this very locale. What Mouginis-Mark didn't expect was so much heat, still lingering from Pinatubo's last eruption, in 1991. That blast, the world's largest in 80 years, dumped more than five cubic kilometers of ash on the mountain's slopes. "The high temperature seems to be preventing vegetation from taking hold," Mouginis-Mark says. And with no root networks to stabilize the debris, rain is bound to wash it into the populated lowlands. 
And so the volcano sheds its waste--with a vengeance. Time and again, monsoon-soaked slurries of mud and rock surge downhill like wayward loads of wet concrete, destroying bridges, homes, lives--often causing more devastation at low elevations than the volcanic eruption itself. These violent flows, known by their Javanese name, lahar, carry everything from talcumlike particles to boulders the size of sport utility vehicles. Intensified by their steep profiles and heavy loads, lahars travel much faster than clear-water streams--in some instances, up to 100 kilometers per hour. 
Such is the recurring threat at hundreds of volcanoes worldwide. But exploring potential lahar hazards by foot takes a lot of time, and in remote or war-torn regions such fieldwork is impossible. That is why Mouginis-Mark and other researchers have turned to satellite imagery and specialized computer programs to help them more efficiently predict where and when lahars may strike. 
During a mission completed in February, a space shuttle crew used cloud-piercing radar to measure the heights of about 136 billion points on the earth. Scientists are now translating those numbers into digital maps that show the topography of the land surface in pixels 30 meters square and 16 meters high. Mouginis-Mark and his colleagues plan to compare that close-up view of Pinatubo with height and width measurements of lahar-swept valleys they took in November. Combined with other satellite records of surface temperature and vegetation, precise topography can help them predict which depressions future lahars may follow and where the next center of activity will be. And none too soon: judging by the amount of rubble still covering Pinatubo's slopes, lahars may continue for another 10 or 20 years, says Ronnie Torres of the Philippine Institute of Volcanology and Seismology in Quezon City. 
Halfway around the globe, scientists are pursuing a different approach to lahar prediction. Richard M. Iverson of the U.S. Geological Survey's Cascades Volcano Observatory in Vancouver, Wash., and two colleagues painstakingly computerized the paths of dozens of past lahars. Now, with an estimate of the volume of ash and debris blanketing a hillside, plus the downslope topography, the computer can generate detailed maps of the areas that lahars are most likely to ravage. Again, precise topography is the key to trustworthy predictions: "If you miss a ridge five or 10 meters high that separates a valley from a city, you can really make a bad mistake," says Iverson, whose team also mixes its own water-and-ash recipes and watches them rage down a 95-meter-long concrete chute to study how lahars transport debris. 
Almost as soon as Iverson's team perfected its computer program--it accurately re-creates well-understood ancient lahars on Mount Rainier--it was recruited to make a prediction. Quito, Ecuador, a city of 1.8 million people, lies a mere 10 kilometers from the summit of Guagua Pichincha, which began to wake up in August 1998 after more than three sleepy centuries. City officials quickly called on the USGS Volcano Disaster Assistance Program, the same crisis response team that helped to predict Pinatubo's 1991 eruption. For the first time, the team added the lahar prediction program to its volcano-monitoring strategy. The computer program forecasts that lahars will likely inundate Quito's western edge if a big eruption occurs. The hazard maps have since appeared on the front page of city newspapers to alert people about which neighborhoods to evacuate in an emergency. 
Back in the Philippines, Torres and others are revising lahar hazard maps for Mayon, the country's most active volcano. They must account for about 30 million cubic meters of ash and lava deposited during a February eruption. Monsoon season has begun, but despite the imminent danger Torres remains optimistic. Unlike earthquakes and other geologic hazards, "lahars are a visible adversary," he says. 

*
March 12, 2001 Monitoring Volcanoes 
Of the 540 active volcanoes on our planet, only 170 have at least one monitor of some kind deployed nearby. So says Dan Miller, who keeps track of these things in his work as head of the Volcanic Disaster Assistance Program (VDAP). The program offers the services of volcanologists from the United States Geological Survey (USGS)-in cooperation with the Office of Foreign Disaster Assistance of the U.S. Agency for International Development-to countries that need help monitoring active volcanoes. In industrialized countries that can afford it, most dangerous volcanoes are well monitored (see chart below). By Miller's definition, that means constant real-time measurements of seismicity, ground deformation and gaseous emissions. It doesn't help to find out several days after an eruption that the volcano had given warning signs, Miller stresses. 
"The USGS installs at minimum for monitoring an unrestful volcano about 10 seismic monitoring stations within 20 kilometers of the volcano," Miller said, "in a network designed to recognize changes in shape of the volcano as the magma comes up." These include tiltmeters, GPS stations, electronic distance measuring networks, leveling lines, dilitometers and instruments to sample and measure CO2 and SO2. 
But very few countries that have active volcanoes in their midst can afford to maintain such systems-despite the threat to millions who live near historically explosive cones. Even in the United States, Miller said, "the strategy is to install at least one station nearby." If the station detects an increase in activity, then an entire monitoring system can be deployed. 
The VDAP has answered the call for about 20 hazardous events since 1986-in Mexico (Colima and Popo), Ecuador (Guagua Pichincha and Tungurahua), the Phillipines (Mayon), El Salvador (Santa Ana) and Nicaragua (where they recently put in place eight new seismic stations), to name a few. The VDAP sends a full complement of observational tools-and experts to train local scientists in how to use the equipment. Then the team comes home to rebuild their instruments for the next time.-NL 

*
What causes a volcano to erupt and how do scientists predict eruptions? 
Answer posted on November 29, 1999
Bob Abram,
Denver, CO 
Attila Kilinc, head of the geology department at the University of Cincinnati, offers this answer. Most recently, Professor Kilinc has been studying volcanoes in Hawaii and Montserrat. 
When a part of the earth's upper mantle or lower crust melts, magma forms. A volcano is essentially an opening or a vent through which this magma and the dissolved gases it contains are discharged. Although there are several factors triggering a volcanic eruption, three predominate: the buoyancy of the magma, the pressure from the exsolved gases in the magma and the injection of a new batch of magma into an already filled magma chamber. What follows is a brief description of these processes. 
As rock inside the earth melts, its mass remains the same while its volume increases--producing a melt that is less dense than the surrounding rock. This lighter magma then rises toward the surface by virtue of its buoyancy. If the density of the magma between the zone of its generation and the surface is less than that of the surrounding and overlying rocks, the magma reaches the surface and erupts. 
Magmas of so-called andesitic and rhyolitic compositions also contain dissolved volatiles such as water, sulfur dioxide and carbon dioxide. Experiments have shown that the amount of a dissolved gas in magma (its solubility) at atmospheric pressure is zero, but rises with increasing pressure. 
For example, in an andesitic magma saturated with water and six kilometers below the surface, about 5 percent of its weight is dissolved water. As this magma moves toward the surface, the solubility of the water in the magma decreases, and so the excess water separates from the magma in the form of bubbles. As the magma moves closer to the surface, more and more water exsolves from the magma, thereby increasing the gas/magma ratio in the conduit. When the volume of bubbles reaches about 75 percent, the magma disintegrates to pyroclasts (partially molten and solid fragments) and erupts explosively. 
The third process that causes volcanic eruptions is an injection of new magma into a chamber that is already filled with magma of similar or different composition. This injection forces some of the magma in the chamber to move up in the conduit and erupt at the surface. 
Although volcanologists are well aware of these three processes, they cannot yet predict a volcanic eruption. But they have made significant advances in forecasting volcanic eruptions. Forecasting involves probable character and time of an eruption in a monitored volcano. The character of an eruption is based on the prehistoric and historic record of the volcano in question and its volcanic products. For example, a violently erupting volcano that has produced ash fall, ash flow and volcanic mudflows (or lahars) is likely to do the same in the future. 
Determining the timing of an eruption in a monitored volcano depends on measuring a number of parameters, including, but not limited to, seismic activity at the volcano (especially depth and frequency of volcanic earthquakes), ground deformations (determined using a tiltmeter and/or GPS, and satellite interferometry), and gas emissions (sampling the amount of sulfur dioxide gas emitted by correlation spectrometer, or COSPEC). An excellent example of successful forecasting occurred in 1991. Volcanologists from the U.S. Geological Survey accurately predicted the June 15 eruption of the Pinatubo Volcano in the Philippines, allowing for the timely evacuation of the Clark Air Base and saving thousands of lives. 

MOLTEN ROCK, or magma, and gasses spew from the mouth of a volcano in the Hawaiian islands.
LAVA TEMPERATURE is one of several indicators that volcanologists regularly monitor in hopes of forecasting major eruptions.

*
March 2001
GEOPHYSICS SUPERPLUMES.
Volcanic Accomplice.
Deadly impacts may have exacerbated massive eruptions
R t t w, NEV.-The Chicxulub Craer, sprawled across the Gulf of Mexico and the Yucatán Peninsula, is an approximately 180kilometer-wide remnant of the impact of a 10-kilometer-wide meteorite. It has been called the smoking gun in the extinction of the dinosaurs between the Cretaceous and "Tertiary periods 65 million years ago. Some geologists, though, are starting to believe the meteorite didn't act alone. Volcanic phenomena known as superplumes may have been accomplices in that and other mass extinctions. "The general idea is that plumes are strengthened by impacts," says Dallas Abbott, a researcher at Columbia University's Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory. At the Geological Society of America meeting in Reno last November, she showed a correlation between the tinning of purported superplumes and large impact events-and their possible association with mass extinctions.
A plume can be visualized as a rising glob of liquid in a slowly warning lava lamp: material hotter than the surrounding rock of the earth's mantle pushes toward the surface in a concentrated stream. The funnel ends below the earth's outer crust, where the plume material spreads and ponds. If the molten rock erupts through the earth's surface, it releases gas and particulates into the air and produces lava flows. A superplume may be a gathering of small plumes, the size of those under the Hawaiian Island chain and Iceland, or one very large plume.
Abbott and her co-worker Ann Isley of the State University of New York at Oswego have catalogued remnants of possible superplumes, including the Deccan Traps in India, the Columbia River flood basalts in the Pacific Northwest and the Siberian Traps. These basalt flows and other associated rocks have large amounts of magnesium, indicating their origin in the depths of the mantle.
The researchers have also logged the probability of large impacts occurring at the same time as plume events. There are about 36 craters more than 10 kilometers wide that formed over the past 120 mil
lion years, Abbott says: "It's a small sample of the potential number." Using the record of earth and lunar impacts, she calculates that of the estimated 4(X) large impactors in the earth's history, 40 percent should have hit continental crust. the rest should have struck ocean crust, in which case their craters would have been subducted into the mantle. "Therefore, we've found only 19 percent of the big ones," Abbott concludes. Of those, "there's
one definitely associated with the PermoTriassic," she says of the mass extinction 250 million years ago. The timing of the other five main mass extinctions, impacts and plume events is close, but you could argue about them, Abbott admits.
One of those events is Chicxulub-and its relation to the Deccan "Traps. Mark Boslough of Sandia National laboratories modeled the so-called seismic focusing that would occur from an impact event on the earth's innards. A large energy release on one side of the earth would set off seismic waves, which would travel through the mantle and converge at the opposite side, or antipode, creating another energy peak. That energy would be converted to heat, raising temperatures in the mantle and increasing melting of the rocky material-thereby heightening the effects of any plume already there
and further contributing to conditions that lead to extinctions.
Abbott is unsure of the exact mechanisms that would strengthen an existing plume, but one possibility is that increasing temperature differentials between the core and the mantle would cause fingerlings of hot core rock to enter the earth's crust. The subsequent increase in volcanism and release of climate-affecting gases would be more than expected for a superplume or impact event alone.
Thanks to plate tectonics, however, the Deccan Traps may not have been antipodal at the time of the Chicxulub impact. If they weren't, Boslough says, "you would have to propose a second impact," directly opposite the Traps, "in the eastern Pacific, on seafloor that's been subducted." Any geological evidence would be gone:
"You have to figure out what is in the geological record" to draw any firm conclusions, Boslough says. From his models, an impact might produce the same kinds of surface manifestations attributed to superplumes: flood basalts, large changes in sea level, radically increased mechanical erosion that alters ocean water chemistry, and sediment deposits that indicate a global change has occurred.
But Abbott and Isley think there is hard evidence for impact-enhanced superplumes: certain types of rocks associated only with superplumes, say, or some kind of universal, physical characteristic in the earth consistent only with major plume events. For now, though, not enough evidence exists to indict superplumes as an extinction accomplice. -Naomi Lubick
NAOMI LUBICK is a freelance writer based in the San Francisco Bay Area.
DECCAN TRAPS are a remnant of volcanism that may have helped kill the dinosaurs.

*
October 30, 2000 
Io's Sulfur Snow.
The aging spacecraft Galileo continues to send home informative snapshots of Jupiter's moons. Its latest series of images offer the closest view yet of Io, known for its ever-erupting volcanoes, oozing lava flows and jagged mountain ranges. The new pictures reveal another characteristic feature of this hostile world: sulfur-rich particles or crystals that blanket much of the satellite like snow. "We see this volatile material everywhere on Io where we've had a close-up look," said Alfred McEwen of the University of Arizona. "It looks like this volatile material is sublimating or eroding away by some means, yet it's still there. We'd like to know where it is coming from, how the surface layer is being supplied." 
The scientists believe that heat from Io's active volcanoes helps redistribute the white pseudo-snow. Images reveal a bluish haze around the lava spreading from Io's Prometheus volcano (above). Arizona graduate student Moses Milazzo explains that the lava's heat turns the volatile solids into gas--and the haze is most likely representative of that gas crystallizing back into solid flakes of a sort. "We see the bright volatiles being redeposited up to about a kilometer away," he adds. One looming question is why this volatile material has not been lost into space over the years or has not become concentrated around Io's colder poles. -- Julia Karow 
*
November 29, 1999 
Erupting Io.
By Alan Hall 

After having its mission extended for two years to observe Jupiter's moons, time is finally running out for the intrepid Galileo spacecraft. So on October 10, tense mission scientists were ready to take some calculated risks. To obtain the closest images yet of Io, Jupiter's turbulent moon, they directed Galileo to make a flyby just 608 kilometers above the surface--an area of intense radiation that might destroy the craft's sensitive electronics. 
Except for a few minor holes burned in its memory, Galileo fortunately came through unscathed. And it returned some of the sharpest images yet of the most volcanically active body in the solar system. The new pictures, which were released by NASA on November 19, reveal a fiery landscape swept with colossal lava flows, vast lava lakes, towering and collapsing mountains and more than 100 active volcanoes. "Io makes Dante's Inferno seem like another day in paradise," quipped imaging team member Alfred McEwen of the Planetary Image Research Laboratory at the University of Arizona.

Indeed, Io is hardly the kind of world that anyone would want to visit for long. One snapshot looking down into the vast caldera of Pele, one of Io's most active volcanoes, displays a glowing hot spot that has remained remarkably intense. Because most lava flows erupt and ooze outward, researchers speculate that this hot spot marks a lava lake that is constantly exposed to new lava through breaks in its crust. Pele's lava lake is 100 times larger than similar active lakes in Hawaiian volcanoes. 
Another shot of Pele, taken at night, reveals a curving line of glowing dots that extend for 9.6 kilometers along the edge of the caldera. Scientists believe this line is liquid lava that becomes exposed as the solidifying crust breaks up along the caldera's walls. Lava solidifies quickly, so these puddles cannot be more than a few minutes old. A photograph of another extremely active volcano, called Prometheus, captures a plume of vaporized sulfur dioxide towering 80 kilometers above an advancing lava flow. Similar plumes were observed at Prometheus by the Voyager spacecraft in 1979. 
Io is also marked by ranges of jagged mountains that soar to 15.8 kilometers (52,000 feet). These mountains do not appear to be of volcanic origin, and scientists are not sure how they form. But the new Galileo images provide an explanation of how they age and die. Smooth, rounded mountains that may be older show signs of huge landslides around their margins. These ridges bear a striking resemblance to the rugged terrain surrounding giant Olympus Mons on Mars. 
The new data from Io is providing scientists with a window on similar volcanic activity that raged on Earth eons ago. The last comparable lava eruption on Earth occurred 15 million years ago, and it's been more than two billion years since lava as hot as that found on Io (reaching 1,480 degrees Celsius, or 2,700 degrees Fahrenheit) flowed on Earth. "Io is the next best thing to traveling back in time to Earth's earlier years," says Torrence Johnson, Galileo project scientist at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory. "It gives us an opportunity to watch, in action, phenomena long dead in the rest of the solar system." 
There may be more to come. On November 25, Galileo's controllers plan a riskier maneuver: Galileo will dip to just 300 kilometers above the surface and may provide researchers with an even closer look at the violent Jovian satellite.

LAVA LAKE. Pele is surrounded by a ring of sulphur, deposited by a volcanic plume that is 1,280 kilometers (800 miles) in diameter. At the center of the caldera is a reddish hot spot, reaching temperatures of 1,027 degrees Celsius. The high temperature area is believed to mark a large lake of lava beneath the solidified crust.

HOT SPOT. Like a beaded necklace, a line of fresh lava from Pele glows red in Io's night. The flow is about 10 kilometers long. Only surfaces hotter than 600 degrees Celsius are visible; the lava in this image would cool and become invisible in just a few minutes. The inset shows the flow superimposed on a daytime image, revealing that the hot material follows the margin of Pele's caldera.

PROMETHEAN PLUME. Lava flows from the volcano's caldera (dark, bean-mishaped feature at left) and extends to the right for about 96 kilometers. A plume, 96 kilometers tall, rises from the end of the flow (right).
BEFORE AND AFTER? Towering non-volcanic mountains on Io are both sharp and angular (left) or smooth and rounded (right). Galileo scientists believe that these images illustrate the deterioration of Ionian mountains. Almost all of the mountains exhibit ridges parallel to their margins. These ridges indicate that the mountains are crumbling from huge landslides.

*
November 19, 2001 
Study Shows Massive Magma Chamber Lies Beneath Vesuvius.
Mount Vesuvius, the volcano most famous for blanketing the towns of Pompei and Herculaneum with lava and debris in A.D. 79, may be sitting atop a reservoir of magma that covers more than 400 square kilometers, a new study suggests. The finding, reported in the current issue of the journal Science by a group of Italian and French scientists, may lead to more accurate monitoring of the area surrounding the volcano. 
Building on previous work that suggested the presence of a magma zone underneath Vesuvius, Emmanuel Auger of the Università di Napoli Federico II in Naples, Italy, and colleagues employed seismic tomography to estimate its size. The scientists produced seismic waves and traced their paths through the zone beneath Vesuvius. Using the speed and direction of the waves, they compiled an image of the crust under the volcano. The picture that emerged, the researchers report, includes a magma reservoir buried eight kilometers deep in the earth's crust that is at least 400 square kilometers wide. "This also tells us that there is a huge amount of available magma under Vesuvius," co-author Paolo Gasparini says. "It was really unexpected for the reservoir to be that size, so very wide and large." 
A better understanding of the reservoir's structure, location and volume, the authors write, "can be used to help prediction of the scenario of the next eruption and to interpret the pattern of the expected precursory seismic activity and ground deformation." Unfortunately for the region's inhabitants, however, it can't help predict when the next eruption will occur. -- Sarah Graham 
*
January 25, 2001 
Solving a Volcanic Mystery.
Scientists have long puzzled over why certain volcanoes, including those ringing the Pacific Ocean, spew forth lava that doesn't match with their chemical predictions. Now it appears they may finally have an answer, reported today in the journal Nature. 
Standard theory holds that the shifting of Earth's plates sends sea floor sediments lying on top of the Pacific Plate down about 60 miles into the planet. "That material then leaks up into the Earth's upper mantle, which causes the mantle to melt and dark basalts to come out of the rock as lava," team member Jonathan M. Lees explains. "What we found makes us think something different is also happening in some places." Previously researchers believed that the slab was too cold to melt and flow to the surface. But when Lees and his colleagues analyzed pieces of hardened lava called adakites from easternmost Russia's Kamchatka province, Adak Island in Alaska'a Aleutian chain and elsewhere, they found that the adakites contain not only mantle but slab, indicating that pieces of the plate had also melted. 
"There appears to be a very large tear in the slab where the Aleutians and Kamchhatka intersect so that the edge of the slab is exposed to mantle," Lees says. "When that happens, as it also does in some other places like California, it allows the mantle to erode the slab so that we see this very interesting and unexpected geochemical signature--or combination of chemicals--near some volcanoes. It's a kind of contamination, or mixing, of mantle and slab." 
"The more seismic and geophysical evidence we come up with in our experiments, the more we seem to find that our model is correct," Lees reports. "For scientists like us, that's fun and pretty exciting. It's showing us how the Earth works, explaining its plumbing system." -- Kate Wong 

<#AS>
*
Science Observer
September-October 1998 
Jöklhlaup
Vatnajökull, Iceland's largest ice cap, blankets approximately 8,100 square kilometers of the aptly named island's surface in ice averaging almost one-half kilometer in thickness. At the temperate glacier's southeastern margin, two major tongues spill summer melt into the Iceland Basin of the North Atlantic. Located at 65 degrees north latitude at the tip of the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, Iceland also holds the distinction of being one of the most poleward locations of active volcanism -- sometimes beneath the ice. And when fire and ice meet, the Icelandic people have a word to describe the glacial flood that's often the result -- jöklhlaup (yo-kuhl-h-lowp). 
According to Oddur Sigurdsson, a geologist with the Icelandic National Energy Authority, a number of volcanoes beneath Vatnajökull have been active this century, but by far the most active has been one called Gri´msvötn. On September 29, 1996, seismometers detected an earthquake of magnitude 5.4 under Vatnajökull, followed by clusters of quakes of somewhat lower magnitude. A day later, the seismic activity subsided, only to be replaced by volcanic tremors. On the morning of October 1, aerial reconnaissance revealed that the surface of the ice was developing a depression between the caldera of two volcanoes. But later that day, the surface of the ice over the Gri´msvötn caldera, at the southeastern end of the forming fissure, had risen by 10 to 15 meters. Then, early on the morning of the 2nd, an eruption broke through the surface of the ice, emitting an ash cloud that reached an altitude of 10 kilometers on the 3rd. 
Icelandic geologists have calculated that the heat transfer to ice from the eruption was approximately 1018 joules of energy -- the equivalent of a Hiroshima nuclear weapon every minute for a week -- and some energy was lost into the air. The volcano quieted on the 13th, but ice continued to melt and, over the course of the next month, formed a 6-to-7-kilometer-long fissure in the glacial bed of Vatnajökull, melting more than 3 cubic kilometers of ice. Unfortunately, little of this water worked its way to the glacial exits 50 kilometers away at the coast. The Gri´msvötn caldera and an ice dam held it back. Through the rest of October, Sigurdsson and his colleagues waited for the inevitable. 
Late on November 4 seismic activity at Gri´msvötn indicated that the ice dam had finally broken, and at 7:20 a.m. on the 5th, meltwater burst vertically and explosively from the surface of the glacier two to three kilometers above its tongue. The water flowing from Gri´msvötn may actually have lifted the 600- to 800-meter-thick glacier as much as a meter before it broke through. By 4:00 on the afternoon of the 5th, the long-awaited jöklhlaup was in full swing. The flood front -- a mixture of meltwater and entrained ice and sediment -- moved from the full 20-kilometer width of the glacier's terminus (its edge) at a speed of about 10 kilometers per hour, forming standing waves 3 to 4 meters high. By midnight that night, the total flow in the five outwash channels peaked at over 50,000 cubic meters per second, making it the second largest river on earth. 
While the 1996 jöklhlaup proceeded to add 7 square kilometers to the area of Iceland, it also erased completely a 376-meter-long bridge, along with a fifth of a 900-meter bridge, 12 kilometers of road, 7 kilometers of dikes and 23 power-line towers, doing $14 million (U.S.) in damage. The second largest jöklhlaup of this century -- a 1918 event on a different ice cap exceeded this one by five times! -- it moved at least 180 million tons of sediment (probably much more) along with 3.4 cubic kilometers of water onto and across the outwash plain Skeidarársandur. 
As awesome as the power of the 1996 jöklhlaup was, however, it may pale before the intensity of activity during the last ice age, when all of Iceland was ice covered. Sediment cores analyzed by C. Lacasse at GEOMAR in Kiel, Germany, and his colleagues at the University of Rhode Island show extensive deposition of volcanic sediments during the Holocene age (beginning about 11,000 years ago). These sediments formed fans in the Icelandic Basin and can account for 30 percent of the sediment column in some cores. Individual gravitational flows, composed of more than 50 percent volcanic material, exceed one-half meter in thickness -- far thicker than sediments deposited by the largest jöklhlaup of this century. 
The Icelandic experience with this volatile mixture of volcanism and glaciation has, in one way, been fortuitous. Icelandic scientists were well prepared for the 1996 jöklhlaup: Although its size was something of a surprise, there were no fatalities or even injuries, and the event's behavior was carefully studied. Their work may be helpful in predicting the retreat of glaciers during global warming, which also can have severe consequences. Bruce Molnia, with the U.S. Geological Survey, has been investigating the Bering Glacier in Alaska as it retreats. In 1994, the ice dam containing Berg Lake was breached, allowing 5.5 cubic kilometers of water to escape in 72 hours, lowering the lake's level by 110 meters. There's every reason to think that the future holds more of the same. 
Glacial melting need not be catastrophic, but neither can it be modeled by the demise of ice cubes in a glass. When what took millennia to form comes apart in mere days, it's little wonder folks give the event a name of its own. -- David Schoonmaker.

*
Sept 2000 v88 i5 p466. 
Title: The Minoan Eruption.(book review) 
Author: Svend Erik Rasmussen 
The Scientific Research Society Fire in the Sea. The Santorini Volcano: Natural History and the Legend of Atlantis. Walter L. Friedrich. Translated by Alexander R. McBirney. xiv + 258 pp. Cambridge University Press, 2000. $34.95. 
Tens of thousands of tourists visit Santorini every year; it is supposedly the most photographed of the Greek islands. Strictly speaking, the name Santorini covers a group of volcanic islands, but it has become almost synonymous with the main island, Thera. Other islands in the group include Therasia and Aspronisi, which with Thera form a ring around a marine basin, or caldera; islands within the caldera indude Palea Kameni and Nea Kameni. Walter Friedrich, a professor of geology at the University of Aarhus, Denmark (where this reviewer is an emeritus professor of inorganic chemistry), based this book on more than 25 years of his own research on the geology and archaeology of Santorini. The text is scholarly but can also be readily understood by readers without a scientific background. First published in German in 1994, the book has now been updated by Friedrich and translated into English by Alexander McBirney, an emeritus professor in the Department of Geological Sciences at the University of Oregon. Fire in the Sea gives an excellent account of the archaeological and geological history of Santorini, which is located in a region of plate collisions and has experienced a number of earthquakes and volcanic eruptions. The author describes the theory of plate tectonics in easily understandable terms, explaining how the collisions of continental plates cause phenomena such as earthquakes and volcanism. One of the most violent volcanic eruptions to rock the ancient world, comparable in strength to the eruption of Krakatau between Java and Sumatra in 1883, was the Minoan eruption, which took place in the Santorini caldera about 3,650 years ago, in the Bronze Age. The form of the islands was altered and much of their surface was covered with a layer of pumice up to 60 meters thick; all life was extinguished. Late in the 19th century, ruins dating from the Bronze Age were discovered beneath the pumice layer near the town of Akrotiri. Later excavations, particularly those done after 1967, yielded a wealth of details. Houses of two and three stories were found, containing rooms decorated with beautiful frescoes, and painted ceramics were found in abundance; it was as if a Bronze Age Pompeii had been uncovered. The findings bear witness to the high cultural level of the people who lived on the island at the time of the eruption, and the frescoes indicate that cultural contacts existed with Crete and Egypt. It is likely that the inhabitants had sufficient warning to evacuate the island before the Minoan eruption, since the excavations, in contrast to those of Pompeii, have not uncovered any human skeletons. The author gives a detailed analysis, based on archaeological, geological and geophysical evidence, of events connected with the Minoan eruption. The eruption has been hypothesized to have been associated with the decline of Minoan culture on Crete. Friedrich observes that radiocarbon dating and studies of ice cores from Greenland point to the year 1645 B.C. as the most likely date for the eruption and notes that because the decline of Minoan culture on Crete is estimated to have taken place about 200 years later, it is unlikely that the two events were related. Friedrich also reviews theories connecting Santorini to the legend of Atlantis and concludes that they leave many questions unanswered. Next follows an account of how Santorini again became inhabited and how new, small islands appeared and disappeared in connection with minor eruptions. At present the volcano is dormant, but it is well worth noting that an eruption occurred as recently as 1950 and that a strong earthquake devastated the town of Oia on the northern part of Thera in 1956. The main text, which provides a readable overview of whatever topic is under discussion, is supplemented by boxed material that treats specific subjects in greater detail. There are three appendices: One contains Plato's dialogues on Atlantis, and the others are lists of fossils and flora. Fire in the Sea could be used in an introductory course on geology, but it is written for a far wider audience. Its lavish color photographs, drawings and computer graphics will have broad appeal. It is indicative of the book's quality that the new archaeological museum at Santorini displays passages from it. Anyone who is interested in earth science, history or archaeology will find an abundance of information about Santorini and about modern methods of geological and archaeological research. Although it is not a tourist guide, the book can add to a visitor's enjoyment of a great number of sites off the beaten track. On my previous trips to Santorini (some of which have included participation in field excursions guided by Dr. Friedrich), I have used the German edition to find interesting places to visit, and I will certainly take the English edition the next time I go. 

<#SCI>
*
26 November 1999
PERSPECTIVES: VOLCANISM.
Will Vesuvius Erupt? Three Million Peuple Need to Know.
Grant Heiken
The Bay of Naples and the adjacent Campanian Plain are rich, the seaside beautiful, and the weather mild. During the time of the Roman empire, this region was a prime location for holiday villas. and during the 18th and 191h centuries, Naples vas required destination on the "Grand Tour" for well-educated, wealthy youths. But the region has also been the site of devastating volcanic eruptions, most notable that of 79 A.D., which buried the thriving Roman town of Pompeii. Today, close to ; million people live in the volcanic areas around Naples, 1 million of them on the slopes of Mount Vesuvius. Historic and geological records and seismic monitoring networks are now providing insights into the patterns of volcanic activity and may help mitigate the hazards of future eruptions.
Neapolitans are well aware of the area's volcanic heritage and are periodically reminded of the potential danger under which they live. In 1982-84, ground uplift and earthquakes in the Phlegrean Fields (see the figure on this page) resulted in the evacuation of thousands of residents from the nearby city of Pozzuoli. When the uplift and seismic activity ceased the political response vas violent and chaotic, including accusations aimed at the Scientists for "crying wolf". But alter the events in the Phlegrean Fields, the Italian National Research Council's National Group of Volcanology and the Ministry for Civil Protection expanded their research effort to better understand the eruption histories of Neapolitan volcanoes. Improved monitoring systems at the Osservatorio Vesuviano (OV) (1) were established along with an intense educational campaign focusing on volcanic eruptions and associated hazards for the region's cities. Scientists are asked tough questions by the public, such as, when will Vesuvius erupt? How will it erupt? And which areas will be affected? These questions are extremely difficult to answer and are best addressed by studying past eruptions and establishing an integrated monitoring network.
Volcanologists from the OV and the Universities of Naples and Pisa have used data from outcrops and drill holes to evaluate the Plinian (explosive) and Strombolian (lava fountains and lava flow) volcanic activity in the area of the Bay of Naples that began 26,000 years ago. During the past 19,000 years, seven Plinian eruptions have occurred at 18,300, 16,780*, 8010, 3360, 1920 (79 A.D.), 1527*. and 368* years before the present (an asterisk denotes smaller scale Plinian eruptions) (2-4). These eruptions each produced between 5 and 11 km3 of volcanic ash and pumice that were deposited as fallout or fast-moving density currents known as pyroclastic flows or surges. Each eruption devastated an area of 20,000 to 30.000 hectares. and some of the currents extended as far as 22 km beyond the crater. Plinian eruptions pose the greatest hazard to people living on or near Vesuvius because the 600°C density currents are capable of flattening 3-m-thick stone walls 10 kin from the vent. In almost all of these explosive eruptions, exsolution of gases from rising magma was followed by pressure release within 2 kin of the surface. magma fragmentation, and eruption. As the eruption progressed the fragmentation process was enhanced when water and magma mixed in limestone aquifers underlying the volcanic and sedimentary deposits of the Campanian Plain (see the figure on this page). Thermally altered fragments from the limestones were also erupted indicating that increased explosive fragmentation, perhaps associated with magma/water mixing, occurred below a depth of 2 km. At the same time as the Plinian eruptions, a caldera (collapse crater), now called Monte Somma, was formed.
Since 79 A.D., Strombolian activity has constructed the summit cone that today partly fills the Monte Somma. Periods of Strombolian activity -more common than Plinian eruptions yet less dangerous- have occurred frequently since 1631 A.D. (see the figure on the next page). There were 18 eruption cycles between 1631 and 1944 alone, ranging from 2 to 37 years, with repose periods of 0.5 to 6.8 years between cycles (3). Since 1944, Vesuvius has seen no activity except fumaroles in the summit crater. This unusually long repose period of 55 years may indicate dormancy or the quiet time preceding a Plinian eruption. To determine which, we must know if there is magma within the crust below Vesuvius. Multiple geophysical surveys by 12 groups from the European Community culminated in the recent TOMOVES (Vesuvius tomography experiment) (5-.7). These surveys included seismic surveys across the Campanian Plain (see the figure on the previous page) that were linked to seismic surveys in the Bay of Naples, The surveys verified an interface at a depth of 2 km between the limestone "basement" and a sequence of overlying volcanic rocks and marine sediments. Knowledge of this interface is important for identifying the depths of potential aquifers where magma water mixing occurred and generated highly explosive activity. A high seismic velocity zone directly below the summit has been interpreted as a solid dike network left by past eruptions. A low-velocity zone. possibly a partial melt. has been tentatively identified at a depth of I () km. Teleseismic events suggest the presence of low-velocity zones below Vesuvius at depths of 15 and 3011 km, These data have helped geophysicists to understand the overall structure of the volcano but are insufficient to identify specific locations of magma bodies.
Prediction of volcanic activity is thus not possible yet. But multiple monitoring networks are in place should Vesuvius resume its volcanic activity, The OV's integrated geophysical network covers the volcano and surrounding plain and would provide the first indication of rising magma. Any ground deformation caused by rising magma would be detected by leveling, tiltmeter. Global Positioning System (GPS). and tidegauge networks. Gas compositions at high-temperature fumaroles are continuously measured.
Over the past decade, no signs of volcanic activity at Vesuvius have been detected (8). But people living on or near the volcano cannot be indifferent. Around the globe, many supposedly dormant or extinct volcanoes have erupted in the past 20 years. Where local populations were well-informed about volcanic eruptions and their effects. timely evacuations saved lives. People living near Vesuvius need ongoing educational programs to accompany state-of-the-art monitoring and detailed research on the volcano's past activity.

References and Notes.
8. Beginning on 9 October 1999, Vesuvius has experienced a series of earthquakes with hypocenters at about 3-km depth. The focal mechanisms were tectonic (strike-slip), and there was no accompanying ground deformation or change in gas compositions to indicate that the earthquakes were volcanic.

The author is at Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM 87545, USA. E-mail: heiken@lanla.gov.

Past Vesuvian activity. This painting of the 1794 eruption as viewed from Naples is typical of Strombolian activity between 1631 and 1944.

*
19 May 2000
PERSPECTIVES: VOLCANOLOGY.
Mount St. Helens, Master Teacher.
Christopher G. Newhall.
On the morning of 18 May 1980, the bulging north flank of Mount St. Helens collapsed into the valley below. Within seconds, the summit followed. Suddenly unroofed, magma and rocks saturated with superheated groundwater exploded and swept northward across 600 km2 of  forested valleys and ridges (1) (see the figure). A roiling ash cloud enveloped the mountain after the first 30 seconds, hiding further events from view, but landslide deposits in the valley recorded three rapid-fire stages of collapse also seen in photographs of the first few seconds (?). Intricate patterns of more than 10 million uprooted trees recorded the speed, path, and temperature of the blast (3). Fifty-seven persons died in the maelstrom. Ash from the blast cloud and from a subsequent 25km-high eruption column fell as far away as Montana and Colorado. As the ash blew eastward, great slurries of mud and trees bore down rivers to the west. The Columbia River channel filled with so much sediment that shipping had to be halted until a new channel could be dredged.
Simultaneously, a blast of excitement swept through the volcanology community. The eruption enabled unprecedented data to be gathered, leading to renewed interest in explosive eruptions. Tragic as it was, the eruption was also a volcanologist's dream: Old outcrops were swept clean, and fresh deposits could be correlated directly with observed phenomena. The interior of the stratovolcano, built of 3000-year old lava domes draped with more lava, ash, and pumice, was open for inspection. Continuing volcanic activity invited studies of magma ascent and eruption.
As at Krakatau (Indonesia) in 1883 and  Mt. Pelée (Martinique) in 1902, Mount St. 8 Helens' eruption elucidated phenomena that were poorly understood and previously thought rare. The Krakatau eruption served  as a reminder of how a large eruption can create a void in the magma reservoir, into which a roof several kilometers in thickness can collapse. It also showed how eruptions beneath and into the sea can generate deadly local tsunamis. Mt. Pelée demonstrated so-called nuées ardentes or pyroclastic flows, fast-moving avalanches of hot rock fragments and volcanic gases. Mount St. Helens in turn featured a giant volcanic landslide - a debris avalanche---and the associated lateral blast (see the figure).
With the giant landslide of Mount St. Helens came a resounding "aha!" in the volcanology community. Suddenly, the origin of puzzling, hummocky deposits around many volcanoes became clear. Before 1980, perhaps half a dozen giant landslides had been inferred, and even fewer witnessed. Since 1980, with the debris avalanche of Mount St. Helens as a reference, volcanologists have recognized evidence for more than 400 prehistoric debris avalanches (4). Gravitational collapse of volcano flanks and summits is now seen as common rather than rare (4, S).
Mount St. Helens also highlighted the large-scale hydrologic changes associated with eruptions, which potentially have even greater effects on populations than the eruptions themselves. On snow- and ice-clad volcanoes, pyroclastic flows can erode, mix with, and melt the frozen carapace to create sediment-laden flash floods (called lahars) (6). These incorporate more sediment and water as they scour their way downstream, increasing several times in volume. Numerous small- to moderate-sized lahars formed in this way at Mount St. Helens. In 1985, a small eruption of Nevado del Ruiz (Colombia) spawned similar lahars that claimed about 22,000 lives.
As a result of the explosive eruption of Mount St. Helens in 1980, infiltration of' rainfall into ash-covered soil slowed by more than an order of magnitude, runoff and erosion increased sharply, and annual sediment yields were among the highest ever observed (7). Today, the river draining the debris avalanche deposit of Mount St. Helens still carries one to two orders of magnitude more suspended sediment than before the eruption, requiring a large dam just to keep this sediment out of lowland channels.
Following the 18 May 1980 eruption, the growing lava dome and other products and processes of Mount St. Helens were studied as never before (8). Patterns of small earthquakes suggested that the magma reservoir was smaller and deeper than inferred from exhumed roots of older strato-volcanoes (9). The roles of magma supply and ascent rates, degassing and crystallization, and other controls on explosive eruptions and dome growth were tested and quantified 1 /0). New monitoring techniques were developed (11), and a w hole new generation of volcanologists was launched. Lessons were also learned about the effects of ash on machines such as jet aircraft, electronics, crops, and human health (12-14). A geoscience bibliography of Mount St. Helens filled a book, now available on CD (15). Equally fascinating research opportunities arose for ecologists (see the accompanying Perspective on page 1183) (16).
The eruption of Mount St. Helens opened the eyes and linked the arms of specialists from many different disciplines. Geologists, geophysicists, geochemists, and hydrologists worked as teams to integrate information across time windows that ranged from centuries to seconds. The U.S. Geological Survey convinced the U.S. Congress to establish a long-sought Cascades Volcano Observatory, where many of these specialists worked side by side to capture all possible lessons of this rare event. Before 1980, some saw sharp divisions between hazards work and basic volcano research, between monitoring and geological studies, between statistics-based forecasts and process-based predictions. Today, forecasts improve as we try to marry a respect for the geologic and historical past, monitoring of the present, and fresh research into a volcano's internal and surficial processes.
Since the eruption, hundreds of volcanologists from around the world have come to study Mount St. Helens. Scientists from the United States have in turn traveled around the world to share the experience of Mount St. Helens and seek lessons from other volcanoes. The U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID) and the U.S. Geological Survey now co-fund a life-saving Volcano Disaster Assistance Program.
Mount St. Helens continues to awe and inspire those who visit. Its lessons are pillars of efforts to better understand and forecast explosive volcanism, its surprises a humbling reminder that nature's repertoire can easily exceed our imagination. Should we worry? More than 500 million
people live within striking range of potentially lethal volcanoes, and the number increases by millions each year (17). Every success in eruption forecasting raises public expectations that the safety of these millions is assured. Forecasts are improving, but uncertainties remain high. Imagine if the next major volcanic crisis replete with uncertainty is in or near a major city. not a forest. Imagine if the trees of Mount St. Helens had been people.


A path of destruction. Blast-downed trees (foreground), hummocky debris avalanche deposit (valley floor), and beheaded Mount St. Helens. A giant landslide in 1980 carried the upper north flank, formerly conical summit, and a large scallop of the volcano's interior into adjoining Spirit Lake (upper left, not visible) and valley of the North fork Toutle River (foreground).

The author is at the United States Geological Survey, Box 351310, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA. E-mail cnewhall@)geophys.washington.edu.

*
18 April 1997
VOLCANOLOGY.
The Ongoing Eruption in Montserrat.
Montserrat Volcano Observatory Team.
At the beginning of the 20th century, volcanology began to evolve into a modern, multidisciplinary science. The circumstances that triggered this growth involved two volcanoes in the Caribbean-Soufrière on St. Vincent and Mont Pelée on Martinique-and one-Santa Maria-in Guatemala. Within 6 months in 1902, explosive eruptions from these volcanoes killed about 36,000 people (1, 2). Jaggar, one of the scientists sent to study the effects of the eruptions, recognized that the reactive, "expeditionary" approach to volcanology then in vogue was inadequate and that it was necessary to observe and measure the behavior of volcanoes-including their seismic, thermal, and gas emission aspects-before, during, and after the eruptions (1 ). The devastation he witnessed, particularly in the tropical city of St. Pierre, Martinique, the Pompeii of modern times, convinced him of the need to understand the processes, then inexplicable, that could kill thousands of people with little warning. Thus, within a decade, the first volcano observatories were established, one in Hawaii and the other in Japan. Others followed, but Jaggar's visionary objective of a global network of observatories has still only been partially achieved, because many of the world's most dangerous volcanoes are still poorly understood, little studied, and inadequately monitored (1-4). This lack of knowledge represents the most pressing problem in reducing volcanic risk in a global context.
Scientific and public interest in volcanoes and volcanology has increased greatly since 1980, stimulated by the dramatic and
well-publicized eruption of Mount St. Helens and the tragic failure of hazard management at Nevado del Ruiz in Colombia, where the death toll at Armero approached that of St. Pierre and left sobering lessons that must not go unheeded (5, 6).
Now, as the century draws to a close, the Caribbean is again the focus us of attention for volcanologists worldwide, for the Soufrière Hills volcano on the Lesser Antilles Emerald Isle of Montserrat is erupting, the hazard management problems are severe, and the necessary scientific response promises a renaissance for volcanology in the United Kingdom and Caribbean comparable to that in the United States produced by Mount St. Helens. The lessons being learned there and the new techniques developed are making this eruption one of historic importance to volcano science (7).
Since the onset of eruptive activity, Soufriére Hills has become one of the most closely monitored volcanoes in the world. Montserrat Volcano Observatory has been established, with staff drawn primarily from the Seismic Research Unit (SRU) of the University of the West Indies in Trinidad and from the U.K. volcanological community, facilitated by the British Geological Survey. Additional assistance has been provided by the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS), the French CNRS, and academic institutions around the world, as well as the citizens of Montserrat. The main foci of the operation comprise seismic, deformation, and gas monitoring, along with visual observations, with helicopter support providing access to crucial locations. Visual monitoring is supported by remote video surveillance of the crater area and by still photography and video recording of dome growth patterns and block-and-ash flow emplacement. Hazard evaluation and zoning has been aided by availability of a modern hazard map published in 1988 (8), with zone maps revised to meet new developments.
A telemetered seismic network provides real-time coverage to a permanently manned operations room. Earthquake swarms since 1992 provided the first clues to the impending eruption; unlike earlier swarms in 18971898, 1933-193 7, and 1966-1967 (8), these swarms led to the current eruption, which began as a small steam-ash outburst on 18 July 1995. The swarms were sufficiently intense in 1994 to prompt SRU to increase the number of seismometers on Montserrat; after the initial eruption, additional instruments were added by SRU, and the USES Volcano Crisis Assistance Team brought a system of telemetered seismometers and data acquisition and analysis computers and software (including real-time seismic amplitude and spectral amplitude technology) tested in the Pinatubo emergency and since improved (9). The network has continued to function with a minimum of eight short-period instruments in continuous operation to the present (with some relocations and replacements).
In October 1996, the network was supplemented by an array of state-of-the-art broadband, wide-dynamic range digital seismometers, intended for long-term monitoring.
The current network records and locates seismic events and classifies the signals into various types, as seismic signals can be generated by magma-pressure-related rock breakage, resonance of magma or gas-filled cracks or conduits, rockfalls, and pyroclastic flows, or by regional tectonic events and cultural or natural noise. By April 1997, more than 60,000 individual events had been detected and recorded.
Frequent field measurement of deformation is done with electronic distance meter (EDM) and differential GPS (Global Positioning System) networks, supplemented by electronic tiltmeters and crack extensometers. Two telemetered geodetic GPS receivers are also used. EDM monitoring to a reflector within the crater detected accelerated coseismic ground displacements before the emergence of fresh lava on 15 November 1995. The viscous, crystal-rich lava (hornblende andesite, 58 to 60% SiO2) piled up about the vent, forming a lava dome, which has continued to exhibit a complex pattern of growth, interspersed by intervals of collapse that produce pyroclastic flows. In order to monitor the changes in dome shape and volume, a method has been invented at Montserrat that combines a hovering helicopter platform (with kinematic GPS control on hover point coordinates) and laser range-finding binoculars (providing distances and angles to dome surface points). Surveys of 15 to 30 distributed points enable construction of a digital elevation model, with dome volumes accurate to within 10%. Repeated weekly helicopter surveys, combined with precision ground surveys and photo analysis, have enabled reconstruction of lava flux over time; the resulting data is unprecedented and crucial to the understanding of magmatic processes.
Gas monitoring is undertaken by ground-based correlation spectrometer, diffusion-tube measurements of SO2, and biweekly analysis of gases from active fumaroles. Chemical analysis of rain, spring water, and ash is also undertaken, in relation to effects on human health. Other methodologies used include petrology and geochemical studies of eruption and hydrothermal system products, experimental phase equilibria, study of pre-eruptive volatiles in glass inclusions, lava viscosity measurements, rock strength measurements, gravity surveys, and elastic deformation and pyroclastic flow emplacement models (Fig. 1).
A notable aspect of the eruption since late March 1996 has been the production of hot, incandescent high-speed flows of blocks and ash resulting from collapse of the lava dome. These pyroclastic flows have traveled from the crater, open to the east, out to the sea, on their way destroying forests and igniting vegetation near the flow path. These flows and related, more dilute, hot ash-cloud surges constitute the principal hazards to the populated areas in southern Montserrat. Up to present, these flows have traveled eastward, but a vertical eruption column could generate pyroclastic flows by column collapse, and these could be directed toward western and northern settlements through low points in the crater wall. This scenario is not wholly imaginative, as on 17 to 18 September 1996, when profound dome collapse led to conduit depressurization and then to an intensive, explosive, nearly vertical eruption column that lasted for nearly an hour. Conduit overpressures are estimated as 20 MPa. The eruption created an ash plume at least 11.3 km high, leading to several encounters with civilian aircraft. A shower of hot ballistic blocks as large as 1 m in diameter rained on the community of Long Ground, 2 km east of the crater, shattering roofs and igniting houses. Thankfully, the community had been evacuated several months earlier.
The capital city, Plymouth (population 5000), only 4 km west of the crater and previously much disturbed by drifting gas and ash clouds, is therefore currently evacuated, along with a number of smaller communities (Fig. ? ). The eruption is causing serious hardship and economic distress to the small island, and the flow of critical supplies is being hindered by the risks to ships and local workers at the port. In general, the officials and the population have been highly educated on volcanic hazards and are demonstrating great fortitude under the situation imposed on them.
Since October 1996, a new dome has filled in the explosion vent, and pyroclastic flows have resumed However, dome
growth has been episodic, out of  phase with swarms of unusual earthquakes that probably reflect magma fracture during injection; the southern crater wall began to shed large rock slides in response to earthquakes in these swarms, and concerns were raised about its stability, fearing a massive depressurization of the dome and conduit behind the wall. Thus, the scientists on Montserrat have remained intrigued, stimulated, and occasionally alarmed by the continuing activity, but the social and economic pressure building on officials and island folk has been unrelenting. As the volcano nears its third year of eruptive activity, the strain is beginning to show.


Fig. 1. A dome in a dome in a dome. The plume, rising on 22 January from the most recent, growing dome, is inset into a hole blasted on 17 September 1996 into the next oldest dome, formed since November 1995. Both are enclosed within the crater rim (on the right) in a prehistoric dome complex, in which the younger domes are pushing outward on the crater rim.
Fig. 2. Map of West Indies showing location of Montserrat and (Inset) Soufrière Hills volcano.

*
7 November 1997
GEOSCIENCE
Drilling Volcanoes.
John C. Eichelberger
Introductory geology textbooks always contain a cutaway view of the inside of a volcano. Although eroded volcanic structures provide some factual basis, the primary source for such diagrams is most often the author's merged impressions of similar drawings in other textbooks. But in reality, the only way to look inside an active volcano is to drill into it. Although difficult, such journeys should be made, given the rich rewards for understanding the processes and environment of volcanic conduits.
Majestic volcanic mountains exist only because magma is more likely to follow an established path to the surface than to make a new one. If this were not so, there would be many ugly little volcanoes and no towering snow-clad giants. This well-known but little questioned phenomenon is more remarkable than it might seem. It is not simply that magma rises vertically, because it is well documented that magma can move up inclined paths too. It is not because magma just moves along the path that requires the minimal hydraulic pressure: We know that lofty summit vents are favored over flank vents. It is not because conduits are "open"; they are not, but are instead occupied by igneous rock emplaced during the preceding eruption Whatever the factors - stress field, structures, chance that guide magma initially along a particular path, this path is subsequently favored.
Yet, in following a previously used path, a new pulse of magma may encounter a very different environment depending on repose time since the last pulse. For a conduit several meters wide in a water-saturated cone, successive pulses will likely find a soft path occupied by partially molten rock only for weeks or months after the previous eruption. Where repose periods are measured in centuries, as is often the case for andesitic volcanoes, the conduit may present no thermal anomaly at all,
and the magma must follow physical discontinuities. Perhaps it "drills" its way upward with magma-heated, abrasive-laden, hydrothermal fluid, g guided by a fracture network within or at the margin of the previous intrusion.
Once an active conduit has been established, the magmatic processes that take place within it are no less remarkable. Rise of magma results in exsolution and loss of water, a dominant component in mole-traction, although not to weight-fraction. Ascending magma inflates to a stiff foam as the combined effects of accumulating bubbles and dehydrating :pelt increase bulk viscosity by many orders of magnitude. Because most of the viscosity increase occurs during the final few hundreds of meters of ascent, most off the pressure drop is just below the surface (1). Fragmentation and explosive expansion, or alternatively degassing and collapse of foam to dense lava, occur in this regime. Lagging far behind is crystallization, which would go to completion in response to water loss even without cooling and would stop most magmas from reaching the surface if the ascent rate did not outrun the crystallization rate.
Researchers have modeled this complex behavior theoretically and have even simulated the conditions of decompression in the laboratory (2). However, the nature of the conduit for a real erupting volcano can be obtained only by drilling to observe near-magmatic conditions or by waiting a million years for the "fossil" conduit to be exposed by erosion.
Conduits also provide the geophysical and geochemical signals that are used by volcano observatories to forecast eruptions. Low-frequency seismic events and the hum of tremor apparently arise from fluid flow in the conduit environment (3). Deformation of the conduit walls produces high-frequency earthquakes as a result of brittle failure, illuminating the plumbing of the volcano. Magmatic gas may exit the conduit chimney ahead of the magma. Precise surface measurements can detect the swelling of a conduit as magma enters it. All of these signs of impending eruption could be better interpreted if we knew what an active conduit and its immediate environment are really like.
The history of drilling volcanoes is brief but exciting. During repeated penetrations of Kilauea Iki lava lake in Hawaii, temperatures reached over 1100°C, a record high. Spray from a lava fountain had formed a pond in a pre-existing crater that was 100 m deep, so that two decades after the eruption, the melt lens wits still tens of meters thick. The molten rock was "cored" with the drill by chilling the lava to glass ahead of the advancing bit with copious cooling water (4), producing beautiful columns of black glass studded with green olivines. These, however, were very shallow holes, and the "magma" had already lost its water through eruption. For deep holes, the temperature record is held by the 4-km WD-1 well at Kakkonda, Japan (5). This drilling, .designed to reach the roots of a producing geothermal field, ended in newly crystallised granite at just over 5X°C. A 2-km hole drilled over a suspected granitic magma body near Mammoth Lakes, California, was inexplicably cool, but is scheduled for deepening to 4 km in the near future. Drilling is also being used to read the record of a large span of the life of a volcano, for example in the drilling currently under way near Hilo, Hawaii (6).
A few drilling efforts are aimed at the central pipe of a volcano. In 1985, my coworkers and 1 slant-drilled the 600-year-old Obsidian Dome volcano near Mammoth Lakes, California, reaching its feeder dike at depths of 500 to 700 m (see figure). These results, which included the recovery of fresh intrusive glass from the feeder wall, were important in developing new concepts of effusive eruption (7) and flow differentiation (8).

Our attempt to repeat this experiment at the Valley of Ten Thousand Smokes in Alaska, the still-hot site of the largest eruption on Earth in this century, ran afoul when the Department of Interior objected to "mechanized" research in the national park containing the site. (S). A bold proposal to drill the seething throat of White Island Volcano in New Zealand failed to surmount obstacles cat safety and funding (9). Another project is in an early planning stage as a result of an international symposium in Shimabara, Japan, in May of this year: a proposal to drill to the conduit of Unzen Volcano (10), active from 1991 to 1995 in an eruption that did $2 billion of damage and took 44 lives.
Successful volcano drilling projects must carefully address issues of safety, funding, environmental protection, property ownership, subsurface targeting, directional drilling in an extreme environment, and public relations. Each of these issues has been overcome at one time or another in other scientific drilling projects, but they have yet to be tackled together in an international project at a single, well-watched, recently active volcano. When they are, the results will permanently change textbook depictions of how volcanoes work and will greatly improve the basis for eruption predictions. Such efforts may ultimately allow drilling into the source chamber itself, sampling live magma quenched in situ. These samples could perhaps answer the age-old question of how the magma "still" works, that is, how magmas as sluggish as molten granite, the key ingredient of continental crust, fractionate so rapidly and cleanly.

The author is at the Alaska Volcano Observatory, Geophysical Institute, University of Alaska, Fairbanks. AK 99775. 

Under the volcano. Oblique aerial photo of the Obsidian Dome volcano with a cutaway drawing of the drill holes intersecting the feeder dike. The width of the field of view is approximately 2 km.

*
3 August 2001
VOLCANOLOGY.
Etna Eruption Puts Volcano Monitoring to the Test.
MOUNT ETNA, SICILY - It's well past midnight. but Patrick Allard has no desire to knock off for the night. He fiddles with a computer in the back of a Land Cruiser parked on hardened lava 2600 meters up Etna's south flank. watching the raw data from a Doppler radar feed onto the screen. Fighting hunger and fatigue-Allard has been at this for weeks-the research director at CNRS, France's basic research agency, gestures at the breathtaking sight rising, unnervingly, just half a kilometer away. "Ten days ago, there was nothing there," he says. Now, in the early morning of 30 July, a volcanic cone already 150 meters tall and growing is shooting magma and gas high into the sky. Every few seconds, hundreds of bombs burst like fireworks from Etna's newest "parasitic" cone, falling in a graceful arc and landing on the steep slope with the rhythmic sound of a breaking wave. The glowing lava blobs tumble in chaotic, seemingly slow-motion patterns resembling the movements of swarms of fireflies.
Allard who collaborates with the Catania section of the National Institute of Geophysics and Volcanology (INGV) in Sicily, Italy, is bouncing radio waves off the erupting magma blocks to measure their velocity and volume and thus get a handle on the amount of energy streaming from the cone. Set incongruously against the lights of Catania at Etna's foot, the cone seems to pause and catch its breath for several seconds. "Get ready," Allard says with evident glee, as acrid sulfur dioxide gas drifts down from the main crater. Suddenly, a supersonic magma jet tears from the cone with a thunderous clap, disgorging car-sized bombs and unleashing a shock wave that presses clothes against body. "Wow;' Allard says. "That was off the scale." Little wonder he doesn't want to pack up. One of the world's most active volcanoes is on fire---and the science is pretty hot, too.
Etna's latest eruptions began on 17 July, and they have attracted scores of volcanologists like Allard eager to use the latest technologies to study this awesome display. So far, Etna's pyrotechnics show no signs of abating. As Science went to press, the half-million-year-old volcano's activity posed little threat to surrounding villages or to individuals who stay off the mountain. Lava flows freely from its vents, as its magma is not as viscous as that in volcanoes such as Mount St. Helens that build lava domes and blow their tops in violent, explosive eruptions.
But Etna is not a simple volcano, and INGV scientists are vigilant for signs that it may be entering a more dangerous phase. Researchers are keeping a 24-hour watch on the volcano, monitoring seismic activity, ground deformations, gas emissions, and gravity changes that track magma up-welling. If Doppler radar and other new techniques prove themselves during this eruption, they could sharpen monitoring and prediction at other hot spots around the world. The stakes are high. Nine times out of ten, says Clive Oppenheimer of the University of Cambridge. U.K., apparent signs of an imminent eruption are red herrings.
"You can't evacuate people and get it wrong;" he says. as many people would inevitably ignore the next evacuation order.
Earth tremors and ground deformations are the key observations that help emergency management authorities predict when a volcano may blow and often just as critically. when it should begin to simmer down. Although volcanologists have long wanted to expand their monitoring toolkit, the need to do so was brought into sharp relief by Montserrat, where volcanic eruptions in 1997 obliterated the tiny Caribbean island's capital. When the eruptions ceased in March 1998, seismic and deformation measurements pointed to the volcano entering a quiescent mode. "It looked like there would be a period where people would be able to move back in;' says Oppenheimer. Offering contrary evidence. however. were analyses of venting gases suggesting that magma remained in the volcano's upper reservoir. In November 1999, Montserrat erupted anew, its violent activity continues to this day.
Sniffing venting gases could improve the forecasting abilities of volcano oracles. Toward this end the young discipline of volcanic geochemistry is the beneficiary of a military spin-off: portable Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectrometers developed for detecting chemical weapons on a battlefield. INGV's Mike Burton is pioneering the use of FTIR spectrometry in monitoring a dynamic volcano such as Etna. "No one's been able to do this before;' says Oppenheimer. who with the late Peter Francis helped develop the technique, which allows scientists to analyze gas clouds rapidly at a safe distance.
Burton put the machine through its paces one recent blistering afternoon near Catania.
Working in a fine rain of black ash perceptible only from a rustling in the foliage and the way it faintly pricks the skin, Burton measured the absorption of the sun's rays passing through the volcano's gas cloud. From this he could decipher the relative amounts of gases - such as sulfur dioxide. hydrogen chloride, and hydrogen fluoride venting from the volcano.
Sitting through earlier gas data. Burton has found an intriguing correlation. Just 4 days before the eruption began. the ratio of sulfur dioxide to hydrogen chloride rose more than twofold. It remains to be seen whether such a sign will presage future eruptions.
More pressingly. the gas ratios should help researchers gauge the stamina of each of Etna's now five active vents by determining which are drawing from the main magma reservoir. "It's difficult to tell if the main central system is feeding all these vents:' sans geologist Renato Cristofolini of the University of Catania. Ebbing sulfur dioxide might suggest less welling up and degassing of magma- and the eruption tapering off. A lengthy eruption such as Etna's last major one. Which lasted from December 1991 to March 1993-would be cause for concern, as it would increase the likelihood of lava tube formation. These hardened lava conduits would funnel molten lava faster and farther down the mountain, perhaps threatening towns. So far. however, all signs point to ample magma-and no end in sight to Etna's latest outburst. Although monitoring tools are getting better, says Oppenheimer. "no one could give you reliable odds on how long the eruption will go". - RICHARD STONE.


Hot science. Volcanologists are monitoring the eruption with an array of instruments.
Gas attack. INGV's infrared spectrometer draws a bead on Etna.

*
27 April 2001
BOOKS: VOLCANOLOGY.
Not "A Piece of Cake"!
Haraldur Sigurdsson.
Thousands of people have died in volcanic disasters this past century. The notable 1902 eruption of Mont Pelée in Martinique killed 28,000, the more recent in 1985 eruption of Nevado del Ruiz in Colombia, 25.000. We tend to attribute such death tolls to a combination of poor planning and the lack of response by the general public, who remain unaware of often obvious alarms. What is generally less known, however, is that those who should be best informed about volcanic hazards continue to die on active volcanoes around the world: at least 32 volcanologists have been killed in the field since 1947. Is volcanology such a primitive science. that repeatedly its practitioners die in action because of our poor understanding of this violent natural process? Or are these scientists a fool-hardy lot, whose hard-driving ambitions lead them to take unacceptable risks'?
In January 1993, an international group of scientists met in Pasto, Colombia, at the foot of Galeras volcano, to conduct a workshop on volcanic hazards. Galeras was one of fifteen volcanoes targeted for a decade of intensive study under a United Nations program for the reduction of natural hazards. The scientists included volcanologists, volcanic gas geochemists, seismologists, and other specialists on active volcanoes. The meeting's importance was greatly heightened by the 1985 Nevado del Ruiz disaster, because the death toll from the mudflows caused by that eruption could have been prevented altogether had Colombian civil authorities heeded a hazard-zone map and other warnings of scientists who were monitoring the volcano.
After a half century of inactivity Galeras experienced several small explosive eruptions between 1988 and July 1992. But it appeared quiet when, for one of the workshop's field trips, 14 scientists descended into the caldera to examine the gases emanating from its inner cone. They were led by Stanley Williams. an American volcanologist who had convened the meeting. As they were winding up their studies on the floor and rim of the crater, the release of pent-up gas pressure inside the volcano ripped apart a dome that had plugged the vent. The small explosion ended the lives of six scientists and threw their remains hundreds of meters from the crater. Three tourists who had tagged along were also killed. Several survivors, some badly wounded, struggled up the caldera walls to safety. Two remarkably brave female volcanologists rushed up Galeras and descended without hesitation into the caldera to rescue others, their quick action clearly saved the lives of the most seriously injured including Williams. Surprisingly, only two of the scientists had worn hard hats or used other safety equipment. The international volcanological community was dumbfounded over the disaster and the loss of their friends and colleagues, but the rest of the world wondered how so many "experts" could become the victims of the phenomenon they claimed to know so well.
The Galeras volcanic disaster is the topic of two recent books, which approach the tragedy from very different directions. In No Apparent Danger, former science writer and geologist Victoria Bruce offers a vivid picture of the event, one based on thorough investigation and extensive interviews with survivors and rescuers. A journalistic account, her riveting and suspenseful book is hard to put down. One of Bruce's main theses is that the scientists, and in particular Williams, had not fully evaluated the dangers before descending into the caldera and climbing the active cone. She raises sensitive issues of competition and professional jealousy among scientists, and she exposes the sad truth that available information is not always shared - sometimes, such as between the seismologists and gas chemists, with deadly results.
A peculiar type of low-frequency l2 to 3 Hz) or long-period seismic events, called tornillos (screws) by Latin American volcanologists. had been observed from Galeras for about two weeks before the fatal eruption. These events are thought to be caused by near-surface bubble formation in magmas or some sort of fluid pressurization process, they had been used successfully to predict an eruption elsewhere. While seismologists thought the tornillos could mean an eruption was imminent, the gas chemists could point to the low sulfur dioxide emission and therefore claim that there was little likelihood of an eruption. Sadly, volcanologists do not look good when each sub-speciality likes to promote its own predictive method and ignores the others.
Bruce makes relatively few judgments and manages to maintain her distance from the subject, leaving interpretation and conclusions to the reader. Regrettably, one gets the feeling that the actions of the volcano experts are often driven more by ego and infighting than by balanced judgment based on scientific information.
In Surviving Galeras, Williams, working with professional writer Fen Montaigne, provides a completely different perspective on the disaster. In his frank but admittedly unclear account, Williams honors those who died in the crater. He paints a wonderful picture of their lives and work, and he movingly describes the grief of their families. The flow of his narrative, however, is frequently interrupted by explanations about how volcanoes work and examples of famous eruptions. These distracting forays merely repeat published work. Regrettably, Williams emphasizes the bravado of work (sometimes with questionable goals) in and around craters at high risk. Thus, there are frequent references to "macho" elements, such as "sucking volcanic gas" as the proper rite of passage for a budding volcanologist. But the only heroes to emerge from his tragic story are those who entered the caldera to rescue the wounded.
For scientists, perhaps the most interesting details are the survivors' reports of geophysical changes that occurred shortly before the explosion. According to Bruce's sources, a tornillo was noted at the Pasto Volcano Observatory about four hours before the eruption, and the information was radioed to the group in the crater. At least a half hour before the explosion, microgravity expert (and victim) Geoff Brown started to detect "rapid fluctuations in gravity" inside the crater. At the time, he attributed them to instrument problems, but in retrospect these signals were probably related to near-surface bubbling or fluid pressure fluctuations in the magma below the dome that plugged the crater. Two other warning signs were a small ash emission from a small vent in the crater floor and a large number of rock falls from the crater walls in the "final minutes before the eruption."
In the months after the disaster, Williams was widely featured in the media, coverage that, he admits, "fed my not inconsiderable ego." Others in the crater that fateful day were increasingly concerned about how his version of the story tended to diminish their roles, and they were dismayed when Williams was referred to as "the sole survivor." To his credit, Williams is disarmingly frank in admitting an error of judgment on this issue. He speculates that his severe head injury may have affected his memory and subsequent actions.
Many volcanologists, including myself, strongly disagree with Williams's claim that "the best work ... comes from those of us who walk into the crater." The 20th-century transformation of our discipline from a descriptive endeavor to a true science stemmed from the meticulous geologic observations and deductions of outstanding field geologists like George P L. Walker on volcanic deposits from past eruptions and from the application of such observations by physics-minded volcanologists like Lionel Wilson to develop numerical and physical models of volcanic processes. None of these advances, nor our progress in understanding the origin and evolution of magmas, required setting foot in an active crater.
Does a young and evolving science learn from a tragedy like Galeras? As a result of the disaster, in 1994 the International Association of Volcanology and Chemistry of the Earth's Interior issued the first safety recommendations for scientists and the public. These guidelines encourage volcanologists to approach active volcanoes with greater caution and better preparation. But the deaths continue. On 27 July 2000, a large party of volcanologists was visiting the summit crater of Indonesia's Semeru volcano when an early-morning explosion killed two scientists and badly injured five others. Like the tragedy at Galeras, this incident reminds us that we know a lot about the workings of volcanoes, but clearly not enough to judge when an active volcano can be safely trodden on. Do we need to continue to take such huge risks`? Let us hope that we can instead bring the concept of "telepresence" to bear on the world's most dangerous volcanoes. By developing and using robots and remotely controlled unmanned vehicles (for scientific instrumentation and for direct observation) we can better protect the public and those whose research may help reduce volcanic hazards.

No Apparent Danger. The True Story of Volcanic Disaster at Galeras and Nevado del Ruiz by Victoria Bruce.
HarperCollins, New York, 2001. 251 pp. $26, C$39.50. ISBN 0-06019920-2.
Surviving Galeras by Stanley Williams and Fen Montaigne. Houghton Mifflin, Boston, 2001. 280 pp. $25. ISBN 0-618-03168-5.
Earlier eruption. May 1989 blasts propelled a plume of ash over Galeras.
Unrecognized warnings. Small numbers of tornillos were recorded at Galeras in the weeks before the fatal eruption.

The author is at the Graduate School of Oceanography, University of Rhode Island, South Ferry Road, Narragansett, RI 02882, USA. E-mail: haraldur@ gsosunl.gso.uri.edu.



<#EAR>
*
Feb 1997 v6 n1 p76(4). 
Title: Saba: hiking a volcano in the sea. 
Author: Daniel Pendick 
Abstract: Saba, a Caribbean island northeast of Puerto Rico, is an ideal location for scuba diving. Saba is part of a volcanic chain, some of which has appeared in historical time. Seafarers brought goats and breadfruit to this island in earlier centuries. S
With a last look at the dormant volcano that made the island of Saba, I slipped beneath the warm waves of the Eastern Caribbean with Hank and George. The last time I'd seen my diving buddies in scuba gear we were in colder surroundings: flailing in a stiff North Atlantic current 15 miles out from New York, preparing to go down to the capsized wreck of a World War I armored cruiser. The sky above was gunmetal-gray, the ocean surface was swelling about two feet up and down and beneath us lay 130 feet of cold, murky seawater. This sunny July day five years later could not have been a greater contrast. Saba is a scuba paradise. The relatively unsullied reefs and rock pinnacles around the island are a coffee-table book of unfamiliar colors and creatures. We felt we had entered a Jacques Cousteau film, except this time we were the cameramen. After we returned from our morning dive, my friends and I would take long, hot hikes, exploring Saba's volcanic face -- which to me, as a volcano weenie, is just as exotic as the underwater landscape. It is one of the many volcanic islands in the Caribbean. Over millions of years, they have formed at the seam between two chunks of seafloor, the Caribbean and Atlantic plates. The Atlantic Plate noses beneath the Caribbean Plate at a rate of about three-quarters of an inch per year. The result is several arc-shaped lines of volcanic islands. Saba lies at the northern tip of the currently active arc, which stretches 375 miles from Saba to Grenada. A half-dozen of the islands have erupted in historical time, including a submarine volcano near Grenada with the charming name Kick 'em Jenny. One of these, the 1902 eruption of Mont Pelee on Martinique, killed 28,000 people. From the air, Saba's volcanic nature is immediately obvious: The 1,312-foot runway of the tiny airport is built across a massive tongue of lava lapping the ocean at the northeast corner of the island. The tip of this flow is one of the very few flat places on the island. Take a step in any direction just about anywhere else, and you're getting a free aerobic workout. One hot afternoon we set out for Fort Bay, a small port on the southwest side of the island. Someone had recently bulldozed a rough road along the shore from the port east to a place called Comer Point. We walked the road to Corner Point and started to ascend the slope up to Windwardside, a town 1,800 vertical feet overhead. At first the slope was gentle and grassy but it quickly became a steep, rocky ridge bordered by two deeply incised canyons. We began to enter the kingdom of the infamous Saban goat -- an alien intruder brought here by seafarers of yore. Eroded pathways strewn with dung pellets crisscrossed the ridge, Small groups of goats lazed in the shade of the occasional tree or pile of lava boulders along the ridge. To us, the goats were a welcome sign of life in a hot, gray, dusty landscape. To the Sabans they are an occasional nuisance and a steady source of stew meat. In the backyard of a house overlooking the slope, we saw a deer hanging from the noose of an animal snare. This served as a warning to that other cloven-hoofed offender: Forage in our gardens at your own risk. At the top of the ridge, we stumbled across a dilapidated section of stonepaved footpath leading off into the brush. Before 1964, when the serpentine road bisecting Saba was completed, people hauled all their needs and belongings along these footpaths -- food, pianos, water, stoves, furniture, whatever. The Sabans are resourceful and independent by necessity and are quite proud of their road. It was once declared an impossibility and still referred to as "the road that couldn't be built." But after taking a correspondence course in civil engineering, some Sabans strung their road along the sides of the volcano. It seems to hang on the slopes with only the lowest of curbs between passing cars and 1,000-foot drops into the abyss. Blind corners on the road are not for the faint of heart. When I asked an elderly man, Mr. Lynch, what life was like before the road, he said, "People were stronger in those days." They must have been. Day after day, he said, the settlers carried water in buckets from springs at the base of the sea cliffs for themselves and their animals, until somebody figured out that they could funnel rainwater from their shingled roofs into underground cisterns. The only place where water isn't hard to come by lies above the towns where people actually live, in the tropical rain forest on the peak of Mount Scenery. This particular hike attracts the most tourists. The trip involves walking a steep trail that includes an incredible 1,064 stone steps. The tip-top of the island lies 2,855 feet above sea level. Here, moss wrings moisture from the trade winds, sustaining the dense vegetation. At the very top lies the Elfin Forest, a verdant cap of old-growth rain forest canopy. It is the only part of the island people have never cut or altered. At the edge of the overgrown crater at the top of Mount Scenery, there's a rock where you can sit to catch your breath and bask in the cool trade winds. From this vantage point, gazing out over Windwardside into the blue Caribbean Sea, Saba feels very much like a small rock lost in a big ocean. To learn how to contribute to Shots, send a self-addressed, stamped envelope to Earth Shots, 21027 Crossroads Circle, Waukesha wi 53186-4055. Or fax us at (414) 796-1142. Or e-mail us at mail@earthmag.com. We'll forward guidelines. 

*
Feb 1997 v6 n1 p32(2). 
Title: Ashes, ashes, all fall down. (oceanic volcanoes)(Four Disasters That Shaped the World) 
Author: Daniel Pendick 
Abstract: Sonar and geochemical studies suggest a large portion of the Mauna Loa Volcano slid into the ocean approximately 105,000 years ago. Data from these studies indicate volcanic islands are not created by a single volcano but belong to a cycle of eruption and crumbling. 
Steaming 50 miles off the west coast of Hawaii's Big Island in 1986, the research vessel Farnella methodically sailed back and forth, scanning strip after strip of seafloor with a sonar beam. This monotonous, 24-hour-a-day course prompted shipboard scientists to call it "mowing the lawn." It was a lawn with enough rocks in it, however, to more than ruin any real mower. Peter Lipman, the scientist on board in charge of scrutinizing each day's batch of sonar images, suspected that 15,000 feet below on the seafloor lay the chunky remains of one of the greatest landslides ever. In the early 1960s, researchers poring over Navy seafloor maps had spotted some curious deposits. One of Lipman's colleagues at the U.S. Geological Survey, James Moore, had proposed the rocks had been dumped there by a catastrophic failure of the west flank of Mauna Loa Volcano. Many of his fellow scientists were skeptical. "They were so astoundingly large," Moore says. "Nothing like that had been talked about before." Then, during Lipman's cruise, a technician handed him a stack of four-by-five-inch images made from the digital side-scanning sonar data. One shot caught Lipman's eye: a tiny corner of the speckled toe of the landslide deposit. Instantly, Lipman thought of Mount St. Helens. The debris field was eerily similar to the lumpy avalanche deposits left behind in 1980 after the flank of the infamous Washington State volcano collapsed. "It looked so blatantly like what we saw from Mount St. Helens that we knew instantaneously we had a very catastrophic feature," Lipman says. "Beyond being a scientific curiosity, this becomes one of the most hazardous events known on Earth." And one of the most creative. The discovery of huge landslide deposits off Hawaii, some carpeting the seafloor out to a distance of 150 miles, has begun to change geologists' understanding of how a lot of volcanic islands, not just those in Hawaii, evolve over time. For a long time, geologists believed that such islands came into being as lava gradually accumulated to form large, domelike, "shield" volcanoes on the seafloor. But, says David Clague, a marine geologist at California's Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute, "what we have now is a much more catastrophic picture: Hawaiian volcanoes may grow quite large, and then big pieces of them slide into the ocean, and then you rebuild them. It's a more repetitive process of growth and destruction, growth and destruction." Indeed, catastrophic collapses have shaped the face of the planet as surely as a sculptor's chisel transforms a block of marble. "A's near as I can tell, every exposed oceanic shield volcano in any of the oceans has evidence for landslides," says Robin Holcomb, a geologist with the Geological Survey who is producing the first comprehensive map of all the Hawaiian slides. He says some 70 slides have been found in the island chain so far. Moreover, on the Big Island, the clock is ticking toward the next one. Holcomb believes the Hawaiian island of Kauai is made up of at least two and probably three different volcanoes, each with a different plumbing system that channeled magma to the surface from slightly different sources. He expects this to take some of his colleagues by surprise. "Because of the island's nearly circular shape and radial pattern of lava flows, most researchers have assumed that there was only one volcano on Kauai," Holcomb says. More important, he thinks that after each volcano had heaped enough layers of lava on the surface, part of it collapsed into the sea. The next volcano was then built on the ruins of the previous one. Kauai lies at the northwest end of the Hawaiian island chain. Piled on its steep, thickly grown slopes are myriad lava flows from past eruptions. To distinguish the work of one volcano from another, Holcomb had to find a way to sort out one flow from another. Unfortunately, lava flows are not nearly as orderly as, say, the stacked layers of sediment in a place like the Grand Canyon. "Instead of being like a layer cake, they're like spaghetti," Holcomb explains. "They come out one on top of each other, but because they are like long strings of spaghetti you can't trace them laterally very far." Last year, Holcomb and two graduate students at the University of Washington in Seattle, Peter Reiners and Nuni Anders, found a way to untangle the strings. They did a precise study of the chemistry of lava flows on the east and west flanks of Kauai and identified two different types, presumably erupted by different volcanoes. "If the magma were coming up from the same plumbing system at the same time, it should be the same on all flanks," Holcomb says. "And it's not." One of the ancient volcanoes lies west of a trough called Waimea Canyon. Holcomb believes the east flank of this old volcano collapsed into the sea at some point. Then a new volcano emerged to the east, building a new lava shield up against the remnant of the previous volcano. Eventually, the east flank of this volcano collapsed, too. There's even preliminary physical and chemical evidence for a third volcano in the northwest corner of the island. Clague doesn't agree with all Holcomb's interpretations of Kauai, but he says a lot of features of volcanic islands -- from Reunion Island in the Indian Ocean to the Canary Islands in the Atlantic -- now make sense when landslides are taken into account. "It's having more of an impact on understanding ocean islands elsewhere now than it is in Hawaii," he says. With the discovery of undersea landslide deposits off Reunion, for example, it's now clear that the island has seen a history similar to Kauai's, with a young volcanic peak built in the ruins of an older collapse. Back on the Big Island of Hawaii, on the south flank of Kilauea, time is running on toward the next catastrophic collapse. Since a peak in volcanic activity in 1975, the island has quieted down -- so much that the chance of a collapse any time soon is very low, according to Roger Denlinger, a Geological Survey scientists who has studied the hazards at Kilauea for years. But that could change dramatically if the plumbing of Mauna Loa should begin to inflate with magma and cause strong volcanic earthquakes, Denlinger cautions. In 1975, powerful volcanic earthquakes caused a 25-mile-wide chunk of the island beneath Kilauea to move seaward some 30 feet and sink an average of six feet. This, Moore says, was "a little spasmodic jerk, a kind of hiccup." But what made the difference between that hiccup and a massive collapse? According to Lipman, this is the "$64,000 question." And it still doesn't have an answer. 

*
Feb 1997 v6 n1 p28(2). 
Title: Waves of destruction. (tsunamis)(Four Disasters That Shaped the World) 
Author: Daniel Pendick 
Abstract: An undersea volcano created a wave at least 50 feet high that killed approximately 32,000 people on August 27, 1883. Tsunamis may be generated by lava flows that erupt into the sea bed and displace large amounts of water. 
People in Anjer, a port town on the west coast of Java, awoke on August 27, 1883, to the not-so-distant rumbling of Krakatau. The volcanic island lay 25 miles to the west, in the Sunda Straits, the narrow body of water between Sumatra and Java. For tens of thousands of people on the Sunda's prosperous shores, the world was about to end. At 10:02 that morning, a tremendous explosion boomed across the ocean. Thirty-five minutes later, Anjer's telegraph master gazed out over the sea and saw what appeared to be hills of water rolling toward him. He ran madly for high ground. Behind him, he heard the sound of the 50-foot wave swatting down coconut palms and crushing houses like so much kindling. When the waters receded, Anjer was a soggy, muddy ruin. Elsewhere along the coast, tsunamis triggered by the eruptions at Krakatau had attacked without mercy, and at least 32,000 people were killed. Some of the waves are estimated to have reached more than 100 feet in height. Ship captains reported that corpses choked some harbors. The telegraph master was one of the few in Anjer who lived to tell the tale. The eruptions he witnessed forever altered the Sunda Straits, obliterating most of Krakatau and excavating a 860-foot-deep hole in the seafloor. Today, surprisingly, scientists are still debating how the eruptions actually caused the waves. The matter is of more than historical interest. Between 1992 to 1996, 17 tsunami attacks around the Pacific killed about 1,700 people. Tsunami researchers would dearly like to understand the waves' physical processes. "We're looking for better warning that will tell us which areas are most likely to be affected," says Costas Synolakis of the University of Southern California. "I think if we could get the warning time to three minutes we could really save lives." Though scientists haven't quite solved the mystery of the Krakatau tsunamis, they are focusing on three explanations. One is that seawater leaking into the volcano and mixing with molten, gas-charged magma generated underwater explosions, pushing a dome of water upwards. The second holds that when the magma reservoir beneath the island emptied, it sucked a mass of water down, setting the surrounding ocean in motion. And the third is that torrents of ash and pumice, or pyroclastic flows, fell into the sea and shoved water to the side from above, creating killer waves. In a 1995 study at the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor, tsunami researchers Kenji Satake and Nazli Nomanbhoy focused on the worst of the tsunami attacks, the one that engulfed Anjer. The researchers inundated Anjer again -- on a computer. They ran simulations of a wave generated by each scenario, basing its size and speed on assumptions about the different water movements in each event. In the computer, the waves smashed against the coast of Java. Nomanbhoy then compared their sizes and arrival times to eyewitness accounts of the real thing. She concluded that the computer tsunami generated by the underwater explosions fit reality better than the other two. The waves from the other models were such a poor fit, she says, that they can be ruled out as physically impossible. But other Krakatau experts prefer to rely directly on geology, not models. According to volcanologist Stephen Self of the University of Hawaii in Honolulu, what happened to the water around Krakatau is best determined by looking at the physical evidence on the seafloor around the island's blasted remnant. In 1990, two of his colleagues, Haraldur Sigurdsson and Steven Carey, made the first direct examination of the ash and debris fields around Krakatau. This evidence points not to underwater explosions at all, but to waves created by the pyroclastic flows. Sigurdsson and Carey strapped on scuba tanks and dove to the floor of the Sunda Straits 65 times, drilling out samples along the way. Everywhere they looked, they found only one thing: pyroclastic flow deposits, made up of ash and pumice rock. "These flows have velocities in excess of 100 miles per hour, and the mass is just enormous. There's no way you can get those things in the water without generating enormous waves," Carey says. The researchers couldn't find any examples of the type of debris that would be produced by undersea explosions -- a rocky mixture blasted from the foundation of the island. "So far, none of that stuff has been seen," says Sigurdsson. As scientists struggle to understand what happened at Krakatau and how tsunamis begin, other researchers are focusing on how killer waves end up: crashing into coastlines. Amidst the interaction of the dark walls of water and the coastline, they wonder, what makes the difference between a tsunami that gently inundates a town like a very high tide and a high-speed wave that bulldozes a town flat? A team of scientists and students led by Synolakis has picked through the wreckage of nine tsunami attacks in the Pacific since 1992, gathering physical evidence and eyewitness reports on the sometimes bizarre and unexpected behavior of the waves. Back at the lab, Synolakis and his student, Vasily Titov, try to get their computer models to reproduce the same effects seen in the field. These "run-up" models calculate the height and speed of a wave once it reaches shallow water and washes onto the shore. In practical terms, run-up models can tell people how far the will have to run to escape a tsunami. Synolakis says one of the most important lessons from this work is that tsunami hazards can vary tremendously from place to place on a coastline. Case in point: During a 1995 tsunami attack in Mexico, the wave hit two neighboring villages. At both locations, the maximum run-up of the water was about 12 feet. But although the villages are only a mile apart, "the destruction was so different that it was just amazing," Titov recalls. In one village, Boca de Iguanos, stone walls were knocked from their foundations. But in the neighboring town, La Manzanilla, the water just slowly rose and receded, causing minimal damage. Titov's current modeling work points to a possible explanation: a 50-foot-deep canyon in the harbor, pointing straight at La Manzanilia. Like a mountain biker bogging down in a patch of deep sand, the tsunami may have lost most of its forward momentum in that canyon. Synolakis and Titov hope their modeling ability will mature to the point where they can issue very specific warnings within minutes of the birth of a tsunami on the ocean, informing people which areas will inundated by the coming waves. And Sigurdsson and Carey will return this year to Krakatau and use special bottom-penetrating sonar to peel away the layers of ash and history beneath the Sunda Straits. Taken together, scientists hope, all this information may give more people like the Anjer telegraph master a running chance. 

*
August 1997 v6 n4 p76(4). 
Title: On the volcano trail. (Kilauea, Hawaii Volcanoes National Park)(includes travel information) 
Author: Jacqueline Wiora Sletto 
Abstract: Kilauea, located in Hawaii Volcanoes National Park on Hawaii Island, has erupted 4 times since 1900. Volcanic eruptions have caused the area of Hawaii Island to increase by more than 300 acres since 1983. The floor of Kilauea is 2.5 miles long and 2 miles wide. 
Subjects: Kilauea - Description and travel Hawaii Volcanoes National Park, 
On the flank of the world's most active volcano, we stood transfixed, watching glowing fingers of lava creep relentlessly over the cliffs and into the sea. They writhed and curled, sometimes surging ahead, sometimes nearly stopping. When one finger touched the ocean, a towering plume of steam shot into the sky, adding a gigantic whoosh to the constant sizzling roar that accompanied this elemental meeting of fire and water. This was genesis in all its raw power and glory. We had come to Hawaii's Big Island, my husband and I, to see creation -- to see where volcanoes had formed, developed, and died and to see an island grow. Since the latest eruptions began in 1983 alone, the island has increased by over 300 acres. So the chance to see one of these live eruptions was one compelling reason to visit Hawaii Volcanoes National Park, but we also hoped to see life returning to a blasted landscape. Today's target was Kilauea, which has erupted 49 times since 1900. To tour the volcano, we took the popular 11-mile Crater Rim Drive, which loops around the Kilauea summit. Just inside the entrance to the park, we stopped at the visitors center to get the latest scoop on the current eruption and guides to sights in the park -- the first for us being the Sulphur Banks. These are deposits that have accumulated in brilliant yellow layers around solfataras, vents in the lava that allow groundwater, heated to steam and mixed with volcanic gases, to escape from deep in earth. The raw smell of rotten eggs hangs in the air, and on a cool, humid day, the steam almost obscures the hillside. Fumaroles, vents that release pure steam with no volcanic gases, are also common in the park. This is true especially at Kilauea's primary pit crater, Halemaumau, which we would visit later. But first we stopped at the observatory, where volcanologists keep a careful watch on eruptions. It's offlimits to the public, but from the viewing platform we studied Kilauea's floor, a huge caldera 2.5 miles long, 2 miles wide, and 400 feet deep. It formed when a large well of underground magma drained away from under the summit, causing the mountain to collapse. We also had a good view of Halemaumau, which lies in the caldera and is believed to be the home of Pele, goddess of fire, according to early Hawaiians. They would pray to her and leave offerings to placate her unpredictable wrath. Even today some people bring gifts, but out of reverence rather than fear, throwing them into Halemaumau after a brief prayer or occasionally leaving them on the rim of the crater. For nearly 100 years, a lava lake roiled in Halemaumau. It was continuously in motion, rising and falling sometimes several hundred feet a day, with molten material surging against the crater walls, fountains spouting 30 feet high, and sulfurous fumes shrouding the crater. This drama was caused by a semi-solid plug of lava in the main conduit that brings the molten rock to Kilauea. Liquid lava continued to surge from below through cracks in the plug and formed a pool 50 feet deep. Both the plug and the liquid lava would move up and down the conduit, with the fluid rising and sinking more quickly so that the plug emerged through it, like an island in a lake of fire. When the liquid drained totally, the glowing plug rested on the crater floor. Then, in 1924, steam explosions ripped open the floor of the crater: Groundwater had come in contact with the lava, turning to steam and building to explosive pressure. Today Halemaumau is quiet except for the lone seabird riding the heated air above the crater and the occasional puff of steam rising from the surface. On the southwest side of the crater, we followed the drive through cooled lava flows from years of eruptions. Here, we stopped along the road and compared the types of lava thrown off by volcano. The more common ones are aa, a rough jumbled lava with a dense interior, and pahoehoe, a smooth or ropey lava. Less common are Pele's tears, Pele's hair, cinders, and spatter. The tears are hardened droplets formed when lava fragments get thrown into the air and cool during flight. Pele's hair is volcanic glass spun out by the wind, forming strands strongly resembling human hair (early Hawaiians regarded these as proof of Pele's existence). Cinders are spongy-looking chunks of lava about the size of a pea, and spatter is a dense lava that flattens when it hits the ground. As we neared the place where the road dips into the caldera and we could sidle up close to Halemaumau, we skirted the edge of Kau Desert, a desolate place on the southern slope of the volcano. It receives 30 to 50 inches of rain a year, more than enough to remain green, yet it is a blasted landscape of scrubby plants eking out a living in the shelter of lava boulders. The cause of the desolation is the rain itself, which carries massive amounts of acid from the summit of Kilauea. Every day the volcano releases 300 tons of sulphur dioxide into the atmosphere, and because of prevailing wind patterns, most of this ends up mixing with the rain that falls on the Kau region. It is a sobering lesson on the effects of acid rain. On the outer slope of the volcano we saw huge gashes in the land. This was the southwest rift zone, a zone of weakness where flank eruptions most often occur. It runs along the volcano from the summit to the coastline and sometimes under the ocean. Huge fissures can be up to 6 feet wide and a mile long, the result of ground movement when magma close to the surface drains out of the area. When we descended to the crater floor, we walked the 3.2-mile trail around Halemaumau; it took us past shards of lava from 40 years of explosions and eruptions. We saw still-active vents, which reminded us that Halemaumau could at any time be the site of Kilauea's next eruption. At Devastation Trail, our next stop, we paused at a cinder cone called Puu Puai, created in 1959 when a lava fountain surged out of a vent in Kilauea's side and threw up cinder bits that fell steadily around the vent, eventually forming the cone. The area has earned the right to the name "Devastation." Puu Puai lies in a shattered landscape littered with cinder and spatter. More than 30 years have passed since this lava smothered a thriving forest here, and plants have now begun to move back in. Some of them are older species that arrived on the islands' shores centuries ago and adapted to this stressed environment -- species such as ohia lahua trees, amau ferns, and sword ferns. Others are exotics brought in during the last 100 years, which often push out native species. It's not clear yet which will prevail. All along the trail, we kept an eye out for local fauna of the avian type: The nene, Hawaii's rare goose and state bird, waddles around these trails, searching for the juicy, bright red berry of the native ohelo bush. Once 25,000 nene roamed Maui and the Big Island, but now their future is questionable -- only 500 remain, most within the park. Humans hunted them nearly to extinction early in the century, and feral cats and mongooses have picked up where humans left off. The Thurston Lava Tube was our last stop on Crater Rim Drive itself. It is a remnant of a channeled pahoehoe lava flow that formed when the outer lava cooled, creating a tube enclosing the still-molten lava river. Lava can travel great distances inside a tube before cooling completely and halting. Once the flow has stopped, the lava inside the tube drains away, leaving a cavelike formation. Most lava tubes are simple vaults, but the Thurston Lava Tube is a huge tunnel rivaling those found in major caves. Leaving Crater Rim Drive behind, we turned onto Chain of Craters Road, descending the eastern slope of the volcano to the Pacific. Along the road we spotted kipukas, islands of rain forest surrounded by lava, left behind when the molten river inexplicably forked and flowed around them. Kipukas provide the seeds of life to recolonize the lava fields and shelter the animal species that will, in time, follow the plants onto the lava. Approaching the sea, we saw a magnificent series of cliffs, or pall, like a giant's staircase leading down to the shimmering Pacific. These form when the ground drops along fault lines or settles along the coast. When enough land drops away, several feet might be added suddenly to a cliff's height. The pall are a dramatic backdrop for the lava flows that pour steadily into the sea when Kilauea is in a gentle eruption phase. Hot lava and icy water produce spectacular explosions, so it's foolhardy to stand close to the point where lava enters the water. Yet standing back is not always easy at a lava flow. The heat and fumes inspired us to take precautions, but the flow was so mesmerizing we wanted to inch closer. At night, it's even more primordial; the hellish glow of the molten rock lights up the jet-black Hawaiian sky and splatters the sea with jewels of fire. When walking back to the car later that evening, we carried the memory of creation. RELATED ARTICLE: GETTING THERE FLIGHTS. Inter-island planes fly into both Kona and Hilo, 30 miles from Kilauea. Flights from the mainland land in Kona, which is about 100 miles from Kilauea. ACCOMMODATIONS. The Hawaii Visitors Bureau (808-961-5797) will gives tips on lodgings, restaurants, car rental, and more. Or leave a message at 800-648-2441; someone from the bureau will mail information, including the names of companies that provide motor tours for visitors who are unable to hike around the park. Be sure to call at least two weeks ahead of arrival time. Once on the island, check the Yellow Pages of the phone book; this is an often-overlooked TOURING. For information on Hawaii Volcanoes National Park, call 808-985-6000. 

*
April 1997 v6 n2 p42(8). 
Title: Loihi rumbles to life. (Hawaiian undersea volcano) 
Author: Noreen Parks 
Abstract: The 1996 rumblings of the Hawaiian undersea volcano called Loihi allowed scientists a unique opportunity to study this phenomenon. Despite the earthquakes and the partial destruction of its summit, scientists are unable to prove the volcano actually erupted. 
Somewhere beneath the waters southeast of Hawaii, the ground was shaking. In mid-July 1996, seismometers at the Hawaii Volcano Observatory began to register a furious series of tremors from the region. Fred Duennebier, a seismologist from the University of Hawaii at Manoa, suspected that Loihi, a submarine volcano 21 miles from Hawaii Island, was erupting. And he knew this was a tremendous opportunity: He and his colleagues could be the first people to see an undersea volcano in action. Their research ship, Ka'imikai O Kanaloa (Hawaiian for "investigator god of the sea"), reached the area over Loihi in early August. Deep-sea earthquakes boomed through the ship's hull. Sonobuoys (underwater microphones) lowered into the water carried a steady stream of ominous cracks, bangs, crashes and shudders back to radio receivers on board. A speaker in the ship's lab broadcast the incessant din. "It was very nerve-racking," recalls geochemist Frank Sansone of the University of Hawaii at Manoa. "It sounded like all hell was breaking loose under the ship." It was. Duennebier, Sansone and other scientists who descended to Loihi's inky depths over the next couple of months found a transformed landscape. The summit of the volcano was "a physical wreck," one researcher said. Loihi's hydrothermal vents -- places where streams of heated seawater flow out of the volcano's interior -- had undergone drastic "replumbing." And a remarkably rich layer of bacterial life was thriving around the vents. Most astonishing of all, part of Loihi's peak was somehow, mysteriously, gone. As researchers struggle to solve this puzzle, some of the pieces seem to challenge conventional ideas about how undersea volcanoes erupt. Scientists have been intensely studying Loihi ("long, tall one" in Hawaiian) for a decade. The volcano stands 9,000 feet tall with its peak more than 3,000 feet beneath the water. During the past 10 years that we've been studying it, Loihi has been quiet," says Alexander Malahoff, director of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's Hawaii Undersea Research Lab. "We thought it was a gentle volcano. " The young volcano will emerge someday as the next island in the Hawaiian chain, so scientists have been watching it closely, hoping to glean clues into the processes that presumably created a string of 125 volcanic islands and under mountains that run several thousand miles north-northwest from Hawaii. Geologists do have a general idea of the processes shaped the chain of islands. A plume of hot rock -- the Hawaiian "hot spot" -- rises from Earth's mantle deep beneath Hawaii Island, often called the Big Island. Scientists believe that during the last 80 million years, as the plate of crust forming the Pacific seafloor crept across this hot spot, magma punched through the crust's surface, slowly building mountains from the seafloor to the air. With Loihi's recent rumblings, scientists got the chance to observe the immediate aftermath of a major event in the submarine stage of that mountain-making process. The burst of seismic activity began on July 16. On July 20 "the volcano started going wild," says Duennebier. "There were more than 40 quakes during one six-hour period." Seismometers recorded over 4,300 earthquakes in July and August - the largest swarm ever recorded on a Hawaiian volcano. Clearly, something major was happening. Duennebier realized that to capture details of the geological event scientists had to get to Loihi quickly. "After seismic and volcanic activity stops, things change very rapidly," says Duennebier, "and many of the effects will just go away." Thunderous landslides of rock loosened by earthquakes could smother fresh regions of lava, for example. Duennebier swiftly contacted a dozen colleagues at Manoa to join in a "rapid response" research cruise, and on August 7 the scientists found themselves rocking in the waters above Loihi. The Ka'imikai cruised back and forth over the volcano, mapping the summit with sonar. Something was missing. For as long as researchers have been diving down to Loihi, the summit had been marked by a football field-sized area of hydrothermal vents called Pele's Vents, named after the Hawaiian goddess of volcanoes. Pele's Vents was a broad expanse of mineralized "chimneys" and shimmering streams of hydrothermal fluids. Such vents form when magma heats up the water percolating through a volcanic edifice. The hot water dissolves minerals and metals from rock inside the volcano and carries them out to the surface through holes. On the Ka'imikai's sonar images, Pele's Vents were nowhere to be seen. A deep depression seemed to mark the old position of the familiar landmark. Duennebier refused to believe it at first. "I said, look we've just made a mistake in navigation -- we'll cross the summit again. So we did, and it was still gone. And we crossed it again, and it was still gone. It was a real shocker." By the second day of the cruise the earthquakes had tapered off, and the crew launched the submersible Pisces V. Duennebier and Sansone dove with veteran submersible pilot Terry Kerby to the near-freezing darkness 3,200 feet below the surface. They approached the volcano's summit after a half-hour descent. Peering through the sub's tiny windows, the researchers confirmed what the ship's sonar had suggested. Pisces Peak -- previously the highest point on the volcano -- was almost completely obliterated. The submersible followed a line of cliffs east of the devastated peak where Pele's Vents once shimmered. Duennebier and Sansone found themselves looking over the edge of a cavernous hole instead of the peak and vents. Dubbed Pele's Pit, the hole measures almost 2,000 feet across and perhaps 800 feet deep and lies just west of two craters already at the summit. David Clague, former chief scientist at the volcano observatory and now director of research and development at Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute, estimated the new crater's volume at well over a million cubic yards. "That's close to the total amount of material that has been erupting annually from Kilauea volcano [on the Big Island during the last several years," he notes. The crater was one of many changes at Loihi's surface. Researchers descended to Loihi a dozen times in the months following last summer's seismic shakeup, and every dive turned up something new. Malahoff discovered precariously balanced boulders the size of buses strewn across a four- to five-square-mile area at the summit. And Sansone found new vents. Though Pele's Vents had vanished, others had opened up elsewhere. "Everywhere we looked we were finding hydrothermal vents," says Sansone. "We visited areas where vents had gone extinct, and there they were, alive again. This says to me that the recent seismic events really have shaken up the plumbing." In hydrothermal fluids collected last summer, Sansone found signs that magma suddenly moved out of a deep chamber inside the volcano. Rapid movements of magma can generate hydrothermal fluids with extremely high concentrations of methane, carbon dioxide and hydrogen sulfide - and that's exactly what Sansone discovered in his samples. Sharply elevated water temperatures also implicated a plumbing shake-up. Loihi's hydrothermal circulation apparently went into overdrive last summer, and the temperature of the fluids streaming from its vents reached about 180 degrees Fahrenheit -- double the previous record. This even affected the surrounding ocean. "The temperature of the water column above Loihi is usually a few hundredths, or at most tenths, of a degree warmer than the surrounding seawater," explains Sansone. "The fact that it was several degrees higher, despite the enormous cooling capacity of the ocean, certainly indicates there was a tremendous amount of heat being pumped out." All that heat and the gasified fluids nourished a surge of new life. When hydrothermal fluids flow out into cold, oxygenated seawater, a host of chemical reactions takes place, producing chemicals such as hydrogen sulfide and iron compounds. Bacteria live off these substances, forming colonies in the shape of spongy, stringy mats. Researchers have often seen bacterial mats on Loihi, but last summer, bacterial growth was surprisingly lush. "In places, the mats have dancing streamers several inches long flowing in the water, and it almost looks like they're on fire. It's really quite beautiful," says Craig Moyer, a microbial geneticist at Michigan State University. The bacteria were not only striking in appearance but astonishingly prolific as well. When the scientists vacuum-cleaned patches of rock using a suction sampler on the sub's robotic arm, they found fresh bacterial growth smothering the patches a few days later. These dramatic transformations left scientists with a big question: What happened on the inside of Loihi to force these changes on the outside? Scientists agree that magma must have drained from somewhere beneath the summit, collapsing Pele's Vents and most of Pisces Peak and leaving a huge crater in their place. It's still not clear, however, where that magma went. It either erupted somewhere on Loihi's surface, or it may have shifted around deep inside the volcano, pushing into cracks inside the flanks. Duennebier thinks that an eruption occurred and that it took place on the north end of the summit. "It's hard to imagine what all that noise was on the sonobuoys if not an eruption," he contends. Water chemistry measurements also suggested an eruption. Researchers found a plume of particularly warm water containing suspended rock dust flowing from the north end of Loihi's summit. What they didn't find was an eruption site. Dust limited visibility in some places to less than three feet. And since physical evidence of an eruption could have been anywhere on Loihi's huge surface, Duennebier argues, it's not surprising that no submersible dives disclosed an eruption site. Loihi measures eight miles by 16 miles, and an eight-hour dive inside Pisces V may carry scientists one or two miles at best. Visibility is never much better than 50 feet. Moreover, an eruption could have occurred below the submersible's depth limit of 6,000 feet. "It was kind of like looking for a dime with a flashlight on a dark football field," says Duennebier. But there's a chance that a dime might not even exist. Earthquake data do not support the idea that an eruption wreaked havoc at the summit. Earthquakes often signal magma movements that precede an eruption of lava, and knowing earthquake locations can help scientists pinpoint eruption sites. The seismic waves produced by the shocks indicate that Loihi's summer earthquakes occurred far below the volcano, six to seven miles deep, and not at Pele's Pit or anywhere else on the summit. At this point, seismologists can conclude only that magma at that depth shifted considerably. Rocks collected from Loihi add to the confusion. Using the submersible's robotic arm, Duennebier collected black glassy rocks that look like they came from an explosion. But scientists didn't think that explosive eruptions could happen under the crushing pressures at Loihi's depths. Rocks collected from past trips to Loihi show that during most eruptions on the young volcano, lava has oozed out slowly -- like toothpaste from a tube -- forming lobes of "pillow" lava. It's also odd that Duennebier picked up the rocks from the west side of Loihi's summit: July's sonobuoy recordings pointed to the north side of the summit as the most tumultuous area last summer. It's possible that the rocks are remnants of some past explosion having no connection to this summer's rumblings. But Michael Garcia, a petrochemist at the University of Hawaii at Manoa, is dubious. He has scrutinized many of the rocks collected from Loihi over the years. Garcia says he's never seen anything like the samples from the west side. The strong chemicals in the hydrothermal fluids around Loihi tend to dull or discolor lava rock quickly after it is erupted, Garcia says. "These samples show no alterations -- they're absolutely pristine," he says. Garcia's studies suggest that the rocks originated from material stored in a magma chamber six miles deep. Magma could have flowed up from that depth and perhaps sat in a more shallow location before being ejected in a recent explosion. Garcia admits it is conceivable that the volcano spit out those rocks before last summer's seismic activity. He hopes to pinpoint the ages of the rocks with a new dating technique that relies on radioactive polonium. Researchers discovered additional mysterious rocks on Loihi's southern flan-k. Clague found fragile needles of rock called Pele's hair, for example. Pele's hair - formed when lava is ejected rapidly through the water and stretched -- hints that a surprisingly explosive eruption took place. "I don't know how you'd do this at water depths of more than a kilometer," Clague muses. The strange collection of rocks from Loihi implies that some sort of explosive eruption actually can occur at depths like Loihi's. "It's telling us something about the style of eruptions at this volcanic stage, and we just have to learn more about it," says Clague. While the Loihi explorers puzzle over the geological processes that shake the deep-sea volcano, they are also strengthening their appreciation for the volcano's possible links with global processes. John Lupton of the National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration's Pacific Marine Environmental Laboratory has direct evidence of Loihi's potentially far-reaching influence on the oceans. Even before Loihi's season of change, Lupton found a plume of helium in the deep waters of the North Pacific that bore Loihi's signature. Water from Loihi's vents contains a distinctive mixture of helium isotopes -- versions of the element that differ from each other only in atomic weight. Researchers can use that unique mixture to track water from Loihi's vents. Helium with Loihi's signature appeared in extremely high concentrations in Hawaiian waters, but Lupton could still detect it 3,000 miles away, near coastal Mexico. Deep ocean currents presumably transported the volcano's fluids across that vast distance. If helium could travel that far, so might other chemicals, such as iron. Iron is an essential nutrient for phytoplankton -- microscopic ocean plants that form the base of many oceanic food chains -- and some scientists have suggested that the ocean's supply of this key element may limit plant growth. Loihi's hydrothermal fluids contain 20,000 times more iron than normal seawater does, so the underwater volcano could significantly affect iron's flow through the oceans. "Anyone trying to figure out how iron and a number of other chemical elements cycle through the oceans has to consider the significance of hydrothermal systems," Sansone explains. Along with helium-laden water and rocks, the latest explorations on Hawaii's "long, tall" underwater volcano have pulled many questions from Loihi's depths. "We're learning a lot," Garcia says. "Our old prejudices about how things work, which perhaps we gained by looking at processes on land, may not be all that reliable underwater. It's a story that's still evolving." 

*
Source: Earth, April 1997 v6 n2 p15(1). 
Title: Earth Chronicles. (significant geological events in the November 13, 1996 to January 14, 1997 period) 
Abstract: Global geological events occurring between Nov. 13, 1996 and Jan. 14, 1997 are described. These include earthquakes, volcano eruptions, mud or landslides, avalanches, snow, and freezing weather conditions. Mary Leakey's death in Dec 1996 is also noted. 
This dateline covers the period from November 13, 1996, to January 14, 1997. It includes all reported earthquakes of magnitude 6.4 and higher. November 14 -- Torrential rains cause a landslide in the Makaha Valley on the island of Oahu, Hawaii. Two people are reported missing. November 19 -- Spokane, Washington, experiences one of the worst ice storms in its recorded history, enduring power outages that leave parts of the town without electricity for three days. November 19 -- Heavy rains cause mudslides in Oregon, killing 4 people; a snowstorm in the Cascade Mountains leads to 1 death. November 19 -- A magnitude 7.1 earthquake shakes a remote region of the Karakoram Range of eastern Kashmir. November 21 -- Hurricane Marco pounds Nicaragua with heavy rains that wash away homes and leave 2 people dead. November 21 -- Me-Akan Volcano in Hokkaido, Japan, erupts for the first time since 1988, causing minor ash falls. November 26 -- Snowstorms and icy weather throughout Texas and across the Midwestern United States cause at least 19 deaths. November 30 -- Near the Japanese island of Kyushu, a 6.6-magnitude earthquake creates a minor tsunami that hits the southeast coast. November 30 -- Earthquake swarms intensify under Soufriere Hills Volcano in Montserrat, West Indies, collapsing part of the crater wall. December 3 -- Manam Volcano, on Port Moresby Island, Papua New Guinea, erupts violently. The village of Buduwa, which was relocated after a volcanic eruption in 1957, is destroyed again. Seventeen people are injured and at least 2 people are killed. December 6 -- Rain and snow in Otari, Japan, cause a mudslide along the banks of the Kamaharasawa River, killing 14 construction workers. December 9 -- Mary Leakey dies at age 83. Leakey made significant archaeological and anthropological discoveries indicating that humans evolved in East Africa earlier than once believed. December 9 -- Atmospheric scientist William Gray, the world's leading expert on hurricanes, predicts that 11 named hurricanes will develop in the Atlantic Ocean in 1997. December 11 -- Pavlof Volcano, on the Alaskan Peninsula, sends ash up 17,000 feet, continuing the eruptive series that began September 15. December 16 -- In the backcountry of Canada's Garibaldi Provincial Park in British Columbia, an avalanche kills three German tourists skiing the Phalanx Glacier. December 23 -- An avalanche in the Cascade Mountains in Washington claims the lives of 2 teenage hikers. December 23 -- Nine feet of snow buries parts of the Sierra Nevada, knocking out power and shutting down highways. December 25 -- Tropical storm Greg rips through Malaysia, claiming at least 111 lives. January 2 -- Powerful storms hammer the northwestern United States, causing the worst flooding in Reno, Nevada, in 40 years and forcing thousands of people to evacuate their homes. January 7 -- Rushing floodwaters capsize a bus in Rabat, Morocco, and claim more than 20 lives. January 8 -- For at least two weeks, freezing weather grips Europe from Scandinavia to the Mediterranean, leading to nearly 250 deaths. January 11 -- A magnitude 6.8 earthquake rocks Michoacan, Mexico. January 14 -- Heavy snow contributes to 14 deaths in the northeast mountains of China's Xinjiang region. 

*
Dec 1997 v6 n6 p32(8). 
Title: Chasing the volcano.(geological discovery of the world's largest volcanic crater) 
Author: Peter Lipman 
Abstract: A geologist describes the procedure by which the La Garita volcanic depression became to be recognized as the largest in the world. The discovery led to a remapping of the San Juan Mountains. The huge La Garita volcano is capable of an output that dwarfs eruptions of modern times. 
The outrageous idea came to me while I was eating lunch. I was on a rocky ledge in the La Garita Mountains in southwestern Colorado, munching on a salami and cheese sandwich on a summer afternoon in 1969. I was also worrying about work. The U.S. Geological Survey had sent my boss, Tom Steven, and me here to spend a few months appraising the mineral potential of the peaks in this region. Things were not going well. Tom and I had been mapping thick layers of solidified ash, but the rocks seemed to be speaking to us in a language that we didn't understand. Trying to figure out which rocks came from where in any region is a messy job, because the rock record is full of gaps that need to be bridged and irrelevant details that need to be ignored. To work effectively, geologists need some kind of conceptual framework to tell them what they can safely overlook and what to look for next. So while they try to piece together the big story of the rocks, geologists tell themselves smaller, provisional stories -- working hypotheses about what their observations might ultimately mean. Unfortunately, a good working hypothesis for La Garita was just what we lacked. We knew that the area, along with other nearby parts of the San Juan Mountains, was strewn with the cores of ancient volcanoes. Four of them lay within thirty miles of us, recognizable by the masses of volcanic rock, thousands of feet thick, that they had left behind. We also knew that the mountains were littered with much thinner sheets of volcanic ash. But which sheet had come from which volcano? Which sheets had come from the same explosions, and in what order? Nobody could say. Geologists before us had tried to sort the ash beds into older and younger layers, assigning them to different volcanoes, but teams working in different areas had come up with conflicting results. Tom and I joked that if you traced an ash bed from exposure to exposure in a huge circle through the San Juan Mountains, you would wind up two layers above the one you started in. We called it "San Juan spiral stratigraphy." Now Tom had gone away for the Fourth of July weekend. Except for a few cows grazing in the distance, I seemed to be alone in the mountains. As I gazed across the vast flower-filled grassy meadows of Saguache Park to the treeless mountain ridges above, some of them still white with patches of snow, I started to make up a story about the rocks. Twenty-five miles to the south, across the La Garita Mountains, lay the Creede mining district, which Tom had mapped years earlier. The ash layers there looked different from the ones we were working in, but one layer in each area contained an unusual assortment of minerals, including green bladed hornblende -- a peculiarity the layers shared with as many as six previously identified kinds of ash in the vast San Juan region, among them the enigmatic thick brown rock that made up the La Garita mountains themselves. What if all the hornblende-rich ash layers came, not from several volcanic eruptions, but from one enormous blast? It might explain the common mineral patterns. And I could be sitting inside the biggest volcano ever discovered! Almost thirty years later, my wild idea is accepted fact. La Garita was made by one of the largest volcanic eruptions, if not the largest, ever. The twenty-eight-million-year-old explosion that created the collapsed crater, or caldera, must have been more than a thousand times the size of the 1991 eruption of Mount Pinatubo in the Philippines and ten thousand times the size of the 1980 eruption of Mount St. Helens. It took us decades of careful work, matching up many different kinds of evidence, to come to these rather remarkable conclusions. INCONCEIVABLY BIG Tom Steven and I were not the first mappers to be stymied by the rocks in the San Juan Mountains. In the 1910s and 1920s, field geologists found that the region was blanketed with enormous sheets of a pale gray to brown volcanic rock called rhyolite, some of them stretching for a hundred miles or more. Laboratory geologists scoffed. Their experiments had shown that molten rhyolite lava is too thick to ooze more than a few miles from its source vent. There couldn't possibly have been enough volcanoes around the flood the west with rhyolite. The deadlock lasted until the 1950s, when geologists realized most of the rhyolite hadn't come from lava flows at all. It was welded tuff -- solidified volcanic ash -- which exploded out of volcanic vents tens of millions of years ago and avalanched across the countryside at speeds as high as seventy-five miles per hour and temperatures of 1,300 to 1,500 degrees Fahrenheit. Tuff starts out full of gas bubbles and other spaces, but as it piles up it flattens and flows under its own weight, kneading itself into a wadded-up mass of ash and pumice fragments that can be a dead ringer for solidified lava. Soon after learning what the rock was, geologists started to uncover where it had come from. By the early 1960s they had begun to recognize the broad features of a few prehistoric craters and ash flows in the Rocky Mountains, such as the 1.1-million-year-old Valles caldera near Los Alamos in northern New Mexico; Tom, in fact, had discovered a 26.5-million-year-old caldera, the Creede, in the San Juan Mountains. The eroded volcanic cores gave volcanologists a natural laboratory for studying what goes on in the depths of active volcanoes, places where no human being can go. The Colorado volcanoes, however, were to modern volcanoes what the Great Pyramid of Giza is to a pup tent. At the time of their discovery they were among the largest volcanoes recognized on Earth. Their craters, as much as twelve miles across, testified to eruptions incomprehensibly grander and more violent than anything human beings have ever witnessed. For field geologists, those ancient volcanoes were also damnably difficult to map. After the last one went extinct about twenty-five million years ago, streams and glaciers carved the landscape into canyons and mountains that bear little relation to the original volcanic surfaces. As a result, deciphering the history of old volcanoes is like putting together a jigsaw puzzle without a cover picture to guide you and with many pieces lost -- through erosion of the original rocks, burial beneath younger geologic deposits, the camouflage of lush mountain vegetation, and the veiling haze of geologic time. In understanding the volcanic features and the eruptions that caused them, aerial photographs and even satellite images are little help. Geologists must go into the field and map the preserved remnants of those eruptions one by one -- a hard, time-consuming, often frustrating process. Tom had tasted some of that frustration in 1962, when a spend a long summer trying to fathom the rocks of the La Garita Mountains. The rocks themselves were easy enough to identify; the problem was that there were too many of them, and they were all the same. To discover how big the La Garita caldera was, Tom needed to find its margin -- some change in the rock that would show where the inside of the former crater left off and the wall began. In the La Garita Mountains, however, the entire range is all of a piece: one huge block of welded tuff. There seemed to be no end to it. As I munched my sandwich on the Fourth of July of 1969, I finally had an explanation for Tom's frustration. The reason he couldn't find the edge of the caldera was that he was nowhere near it. My new picture of La Garita seemed to fit the facts perfectly. As far as I could tell, there were only two things wrong with it. First, the caldera would have to be almost inconceivably big. And second, many crucial things geologists knew about the San Juan Mountains would have to be wrong. That included Tom Steven and me. Tom took the news well. He didn't mind that my picture of La Garita's history contradicted some of his own theories. Instead, he enthusiastically suggested ways of testing it. It all boiled down to answering a few key questions: Was it physically possible for all the distinctive hornblende-bearing tuff sheets in the San Juan region to have been a single sheet? Were they the right age to have been blasted out in a single massive eruption? Just how big was the La Garita caldera, and where were its boundaries? We started by singling out places where earlier mappers might have made mistakes. The first site we re-examined lay in the canyon of the Rio Grande, between South Fork and Creede. Within a few hours we knew we were on the right track. The rocks there changed abruptly across a side valley. Earlier mappers had decided that the layers of tuff must have slid apart along a complex series of now-hidden faults. We saw a much simpler picture: the rock changed because the valley marked the eroded remnants of the La Garita caldera wall. Near the river lay a shattered block of the hornblende-bearing welded tuff almost half a mile across. Clearly it had skidded from the caldera rim partway down the wall, where it had been covered by younger tuff sheets that flooded the interior of the volcanic depression. It was all so obvious, now that we what to look for. Within a few weeks, we were well on our way to redrawing the geologic map of the San Juan Mountains. Previously, geologists thought the San Juan calderas had collapsed almost as soon as they started erupting, trapping and thickly ponding all the erupting tuff inside them. We soon proved that each caldera was surrounded by its own sheet of outflow tuff, commonly about a hundred feet thick and stretching as much as seventy-five miles beyond the caldera rim. Similar outflow deposits have since been found in most major ash-flow eruptions throughout the world. The biggest outflow sheet in the San Juans belonged to the tremendous La Garita volcano itself. Of more than twenty previously identified "different" tuff sheets ringing the La Garita Mountains, six turned out to be the same material. All of them contained the same telltale set of chemicals and minerals, and radioactive dating showed they were the same age, about 27.8 million years old. Later the various tuff sheets were renamed Fish Canyon Tuff, after an outflow sheet ten miles northwest of Saguache Park. By the end of the summer, we had blocked out the shape of the La Garita caldera as an elliptical volcanic depression twenty by thirty miles across. Our mental picture of the area now looked something like this: On the outskirts of La Garita lay patches of Fish Canyon Tuff, scattered erosional remnants of a single sheet of outflow tuff. In the middle, at ground zero, rose the La Garita mountains themselves -- those peculiarly thick blocks of welded tuff that had so maddened Tom only a few years before. Now they didn't look maddening at all. They, too, turned out to be made of Fish Canyon Tuff. It was harder, denser, browner than the other rocks with the same name, but that was only because it had piled up miles deep and been slow-roasted inside the immense caldera of La Garita volcano. Twenty-seven and a half million years ago, after the big eruption, the ash compacted, cooled, and turned to rock. The center of the volcano caved in, forming a caldera. In time the volcano, too, cooled and went extinct. On its massive flanks, younger volcanoes -- smaller than La Garita but still enormous -- erupted and collapsed, erupted and collapsed, leaving behind more calderas that now dot the central San Juan Mountains. Faults and fractures opened by the eruptions later filled with the billion-dollar silver-lead-zinc ores of the Creede mining district, now the standard textbook example of volcano-related vein deposits. When those younger volcanoes collapsed, they took much of the La Garita caldera with them. The southern edge of the caldera in particular seemed to have vanished. We assumed that it was now somewhere beneath Creede, buried under thousands of feet of younger volcanic ash from the Creede caldera. SHRAPNEL FROM THE EXPLOSION Our 1969 story of the La Garita caldera and the Fish Canyon Tuff held up well for almost twenty-five years. In that time the San Juan volcanic field became a world-famous example of large-scale continental volcanic activity associated with important ore deposits. Five international conferences and field workshops were held there in the 1980s. Meanwhile, my research took me far afield, to active volcanoes in Hawaii and at Mount St Helens, and to the deeply eroded roots of ancient volcanoes in New Mexico, Arizona, Utah, and Russia. It was almost twenty years before I returned to La Garita. I went back in 1986 as the head of a geologic team laying the groundwork for a scientific drilling project to study how metallic minerals such as silver form in volcanic settings such as the Creede district. Volcanologists had neglected the area since Tom had worked there thirty years earlier. Now, with new scientific techniques and concepts at our disposal, my co-workers and I could see things in the old volcanic rocks that nobody had noticed before. One important discovery was additional segments of the La Garita caldera wall. We found them while revisiting some large volcanic deposits that Tom and I had mapped as lava flows and welded tuffs on the flanks of the volcano. Now, looking more closely at those rocks, I saw that they were ponded against steep slopes that had formed when the Fish Canyon Tuff erupted. In other words, the tuff had piled up not on the shallow sides of the volcano, but inside its very rim. That discovery showed that the northern and western margins of the La Garita caldera lay miles farther out than anyone had thought. La Garita was growing again. From 1990 to 1994, my research was interrupted while I managed the USGS Volcano Hazards Program. In the summer of 1995, however, I was back at La Garita, with the Swiss volcanologist Michael Dungan, of the University of Geneva, and his student Olivier Bachmann. This time the story of La Garita took an even stranger twist. While out in the field, we stumbled onto something that made us completely overhaul our mental maps of the caldera. Not only was the caldera even bigger than we had thought, but its shape was different, too -- in a way that we never would have predicted and are still trying to explain. We started out near Wolf Creek Pass, where Dungan and Bachmann were studying some bizarre rocks I had noticed long before in roadcuts along Highway 160. The rocks had perplexed me for years. They were obvious cousins of the Fish Canyon Tuff but looked unlike anything I had ever seen or heard of, like a weird hybrid of volcanic ash and lava. Instead of containing the pumice typical of explosive eruptions, they contained flattened blobs of what seemed to be solidified dense magma. After mapping a continuous body of the lava-like rocks for more than ten miles, Bachmann and I backpacked into the rugged Weminuche Wilderness south of Creede to see where these mysterious rocks came to an end. And there, above the tree line, in superb glacially scoured exposures, we ran into the familiar gray features of the Fish Canyon Tuff. Years earlier, Tom had reported that there was tuff in the area, but his sketchy geologic map didn't prepare us for what now loomed before us. We were expecting to see a thin veneer of outflow tuff. As far as we were concerned, the thick, dense tuff of the La Garita caldera ended miles behind us, across the Continental Divide. Yet here it was again, more than two thousand feet thick, with no sign of a bottom. It would have looked right at home in the La Garita Mountains. There was no question about it: that rock, and we, were still inside the caldera. After a few hours of searching, we found the caldera wall -- twenty miles south of where it was supposed to be. On our mental maps, the La Garita caldera had now become a twenty-by-fifty mile oval. And that takes some explaining, because most calderas are nearly round. We think that the enormous explosion that created La Garita must have started out in the southern part of the area and, over a few days or weeks, migrated progressively northward. As the center of the eruptive fury shifted, three sections of the volcano, each more or less round and about twenty miles across, collapsed one after another and in different ways. The result was an oval-shaped caldera, bounded on the south by the early lava-like rocks and filled with tuff that included the entire uplifted block of the La Garita Mountains. The more we thought about those odd-looking lava-like rocks, the more important they seemed. If our interpretation was correct, they were the earliest traces of the La Garita eruption. In fact, they appeared to have been erupted before the main explosion and, in a way we could not quite fathom, might even have caused it. A lot hinged on finding out how closely they were related to the rocks in the core of the caldera. Dungan, Bachmann, and I wanted to compare the composition of rocks from the two areas. The volcano's core lay in the what are now the La Garita Mountains. We didn't have samples from that area, but in the USGS archives I found microscope slides of some samples of Fish Canyon Tuff that Tom had collected in the heart of the mountains thirty-five years before. When I studied them, the composition of the caldera rock turned out to be the same as that of the lava-like rock, with one surprising difference: the tuff in Tom's samples was strewn with small rock fragments, less than a tenth of an inch across. The fragments were made of the same minerals as the tuff but differently arranged in interlocking crystals. They were granite. Neither I nor any of my volcanologic colleagues had ever seen anything like them in a volcanic tuff. Between the large crystals were intergrowths of what geologists call graphic granite, wedge-shaped blades that resemble the cuneiform writing of ancient Babylonians. Tuff forms suddenly, in a rain of exploded rock. Granite forms crystal by crystal, in slowly cooling molten rock deep in the crust. The distinctive texture of graphic granite comes about in exactly one way, by rapid crystallization in pools of magma at most a mile or two beneath the surface. We believe the rock fragments in Tom's samples are blown-apart material from the very walls of the subsurface storage reservoirs for the Fish Canyon eruption, caught at the moment of solidifying into granite. Seven years before anyone dreamed there had been a La Garita explosion, Tom had carried home shrapnel from the bomb that set it off. SNAPSHOTS AND SECRETS In combination, the odd lava-like rocks and the flecks of Fish Canyon granite give us snapshots of the magma body at the moment of eruption and at its end. They show that the magma body was spectacularly uniform in composition, despite its huge size. The minerals are beautifully fresh and unaltered, a sign that the rock must have been ripped off the miles-deep magma chamber and rocketed to the surface before they had a chance to react with chemicals in the magma. In laboratory simulations, minerals in magma undergo detectable reactions after only a week or two. That suggests that the eruption of the entire 1,200 cubic miles of Fish Canyon magma, and with it the formation of the La Garita caldera, must have taken a few weeks at most. How did the volcano generate that much magma? How did so much of it accumulate in the crust without triggering an earlier eruption? We are still trying to answer those questions. There are many other things still to be learned about La Garita. Was the magma mostly made of melted crust, or did most of it come from deeper in the earth? How could a volcano erupt so much material with so little variation in composition? Why did different parts of the caldera behave so differently? If the eruption of the lava-like rocks really did trigger the big La Garita explosion, how did they erupt? It may take many years to find good answers to those questions. Some of them I may have to leave to other geologists. A geologist's career lasts only a few decades, and the mountains seem to be getting steeper every year. I have been lucky to see La Garita surrender some of its secrets during my lifetime, but often, while walking down a mountain trail after a strenuous day of fieldwork, I wonder how much more there is to learn and what key pieces of the puzzle we may have missed. 

*
April 1998 v7 n2 p24(8). 
Title: Cooking up a volcano. (researcher and volcanologist John Holloway; includes related articles) 
Author: Michael Milstein 
Abstract: Holloway at the Univ of Arizona, is experimenting with exploding liquid rock in a model volcano to learn how to predict eruptions. How the model volcano works, is discussed. In 1993, an Arizona colleague had his legs crushed, and six people died, when a Colombian volcano erupted. The work of others is discussed. 
With home-brewed lava and fumes, geochemist John Holloway is recreating the deadly recipe that makes liquid rock explode. Diamonds, diamonds, diamonds. John Holloway has a machine that, when it's not working right, makes diamonds. What a pain. "When we're trying to do science, diamonds just get in the way," says Holloway, a geochemist at Arizona State University in Tempe. He is sitting sideways in his office chair, his sandaled feet hanging over one armrest, his tropical shirt ablaze with southwestern color. Overhead, a mobile of the solar system bobs lightly in the air-conditioned breeze. "It's funny. Diamonds are really just a distraction for us." To understand why, you have to walk down several flights of stairs in the squared-off, dowdy building that forms part of Arizona State's physical science complex. There, screwed to the basement door, is an official-looking plastic sign: DEPTHS OF THE EARTH, INC. Beyond the door lies a chamber in which Holloway and his students take rocks, cut them down to the size of marbles, and put them into devices that heat and squeeze them to the temperatures and pressures that the rocks once experienced deep underground. By thrusting rocks back into the inferno of their birth and growth, Holloway opens portals on the chemical and physical processes that drive the planet's insides -- that build mountains, recycle continents, and fuel volcanoes. He swears it's only coincidence that his laboratory resides in a basement. Unfortunately, when Holloway's rocks return to their hellish roots, the equipment that sends them there goes with them. Under the intense pressure, the white-hot graphite rods in the electric heaters tend to recrystallize into microscopic industrial-grade diamonds. That's bad, because the rods must conduct electricity, and diamonds don't. To Holloway, these diamonds are a nuisance. For thirty-five years he has been pursuing something much more elusive: details of the interplay between gases and rocks that determines how rock will melt into magma, where that magma will flow, and precisely when water trapped in rising magma will build unstoppable heads of steam that blow the tops off volcanoes. He does that by building small-scale models -- physical, working models -- of places and processes no flesh-and-blood scientist can ever observe in person. By mimicking volcanoes in the laboratory, for example, Holloway and his colleagues are figuring out how to translate the belches of real volcanoes into warnings of coming violence. And recently Holloway has stepped beyond volcanoes to undertake an even more ambitious project: an imitation deep-ocean hot spring that may help scientists decide whether its ancient real-world counterparts gave birth to life itself. "We do this to understand processes that we really can only dream of seeing or measuring in real life," Holloway says. "The next best thing is simply to replicate them ourselves in an environment where we can see and measure them." In an era of computer models, hands-on science like Holloway's seems almost quaint. Yet experimentalists say the work they do is as crucial as ever. Number crunchers, after all, need numbers, and when direct measurements can't supply them, laboratory models often can. They may be detailed enough to zoom in on individual molecules (see "Smash It with Diamonds," page 28) or broad enough to simulate entire ecosystems (see "Breaking Up the Biosphere," page 31). "Computer models are only as good as the data on which they are based," says Jennifer Blank, a chemist researching high pressure at the University of California in Berkeley. "There's something romantic about actually developing experiments to get that data, which is not available anywhere else." DEADLY PRESSURE Holloway, a fairly low-key individual, nonetheless likes a high-pressure environment. His lab harnesses some impressively muscular equipment. The senior citizen of the place is Big Bertha, a 1960s-vintage vessel about the size and shape of a waist-high stack of paint cans, standing next to a plywood control panel that looks as if it was built by Captain Nemo on a budget. Water-cooled and driven by compressed argon gas, Big Bertha squeezes rock samples at pressures up to 145,000 pounds per square inch. That's about ten thousand times sea-level atmospheric pressure -- roughly what your toes would experience if a Boeing-747 rolled across your foot. Another device nearby goes even further, Using an eighteen-inch diameter hydraulic piston like those in truck jacks, it applies pressures of close to 250,000 atmospheres. Ordinary jacks don't wield such strength; the trick is to focus its force down to one small point, just as the head of a hammer concentrates the force of your swinging arm. In Holloway's machine the "hammerhead" resembles a Chinese puzzle, a complicated, interlocking Rubik's Cube screwed into the jaw of the jack. It is made of glimmering tungsten carbide, the strongest substance next to diamond. In its center lies about one cubic centimeter (six hundredths of a cubic inch) of the rock under scrutiny, encased in a capsule of nonreactive platinum or gold. Using this technique, Holloway and his colleagues have matched the pressures of rock about four hundred miles below Earth's surface, deep within the mantle and dozens of times times deeper than the deepest drillhole. At higher pressures, even everlasting tungsten carbide begins to give. By ratcheting down the jack to the highest pressures, Holloway can keep even very hot rock compressed into a solid. But if the pressure then eases -- as it would when heated mantle rock rises upward and outward -- the rock melts into a more plastic fluid, laboratory magma, of the type that eventually finds its way out of Earth as either lava or other volcanic handicrafts. Long before he thought of building a volcano, Holloway used this pressure-drop technique to study gases trapped in magma. Volcanic magma is charged with dissolved gases such as carbon dioxide, sulfur dioxide, and water vapor. As the magma rises into the volcano, the plunging pressure lets the gases come out of solution and coalesce into bubbles -- just as carbon dioxide does when you pop the top of a soda bottle. In a volcano, the mounting gases can cause explosions with deadly consequences. Volcanologists had long hoped that they could use the gases coming out of volcanic vents, or fumaroles, as a barometer of a volcano's changing moods. In all but a few volcanoes, the gas that actually blows the magma apart is water vapor. The first gas that bubbles up out of magma, however, is carbon dioxide. In the 1980s, Holloway and colleagues at the California Institute of Technology discovered that carbon dioxide starts to fizz when rising magma is about three miles underground -- almost two miles deeper than the level at which water vapor starts to escape. Maybe, they mused, fizzing carbon dioxide could serve as an early warning that dangerous water vapor explosions were in the offing. By tracking the changing levels of different volcanic gases, scientists might be able to gauge a magma's explosive potential -- or even predict when a volcano was about to blow. Holloway was soon to get a somber lesson in how urgent such a warning could be. In. January 1993, his Arizona State colleague Stanley Williams was leading a team of volcanologists studying Galeras Volcano in Colombia. The volcano had been quiet for months. But suddenly, just as the scientists ventured into the crater, it erupted. Fiery rocks hurtled through the air, killing six scientists and three tourists and crushing Williams's legs. (See "Dr. Williams vs. the Volcano," August 1995.) Reviewing the disaster, Williams and his graduate student Tobias Fischer discovered that there had been warning signs of an eruption, but that the scientists had misread them. In the months before Galeras exploded, for example, sulfur dioxide gas had surged from the volcano and then dropped off again. Williams and his colleagues had assumed the volcano had cooled off, in fact, it had come to a quiet boil. Hardening magma had choked off escape routes for the gas, causing the pressure to build and build until it blew. CANNED HEAT Holloway was stunned by the disaster. How could a team of experts have been caught so completely off guard? There must have been other clues; years of experience with magma told him so. But that was experience in the lab; Holloway himself had never studied an active volcano. A year later, when Williams mounted a return expedition to Galeras Volcano, Holloway decided to go along. On the flight to Colombia, Holloway and Fischer had a long talk about the Galeras disaster. In principle, the two men agreed, the chemistry of the gases pouring out of Galeras could have revealed everything that was going on inside the volcano: how much pressure the magma was under, how fast it was cooling and rising, how agitated it was, even when the magma started hardening enough to plug up outlets. But in practice, Fischer said, nobody knew how to interpret the signs. A large part of the problem was that the source of a volcano's gases, the magma chamber, is inaccessible. Scientists usually have to take gas samples from tens or even hundreds of feet above the magma. By the time the fiercely reactive volcanic gases reached the sampling tubes, they might have transformed themselves into a drastically different mix of chemicals. To translate the samples back into the original gases, volcanologists needed to be able to study the gases in the laboratory. Someone really ought to build a model volcanic vent -- an artificial fumarole. Hey, the two thought: let's build a fumarole. And as soon as they got back to Arizona, they set about doing just that. The first prototype, a twelve-dollar pressure cooker from the local Target discount store, was quickly replaced by a much more elaborate system so tall that Holloway and Fischer had to cut a hole in the basement ceiling. (The university quickly offered them a lab on the top floor.) The fumarole resembles an Erector Set skyscraper with a central chimney swaddled in insulation to keep the heat in. The scientists inject simulated volcanic gases through pipes at the base of the chimney. Meanwhile, an industrial-strength pressure cooker sends steam through a heat-resistant quartz tube that brings it to about 1,300 degrees Fahrenheit. The superheated steam and gases shoot up the chimney, through exit ducts, and past a series of sensors that measure how the mixture of gases changes in transit. By studying enough gas mixtures under enough different conditions, the researchers should get a much clearer picture of how the gases pouring out of a real volcano reflect what is going on inside. Eventually, gas-chemistry profiles may prove more accurate than familiar seismic rumblings at telling scientists what volcanoes are up to. As a step toward that goal, next summer Holloway, Williams, and their students will travel to Mount Vesuvius in Italy to measure gases coming out of the volcano and study the chemistry of surface rocks made of cooled-off magma. Then they will try to recreate the readings using the mock fumarole. If all goes well, the results will give them a clear picture of what is happening inside the volcano. RECIPE FOR LIFE? Meanwhile, Holloway's volcanic leanings are also taking him in a different direction: underwater -- in fact, to the bottom of the sea. The idea came to him two years ago at a meeting of the American Geophysical Union in San Francisco. Scientists at the meeting were abuzz with the idea that life may have begun in hot volcanic environments, which were much more common on early Earth than they are now. (See "Life's Crucible," February 1998.) One key piece of evidence is that the most primitive organisms known, bacteria called thermophiles, thrive in the scalding heat of geysers and undersea hot springs. Earlier in Earth's history, similar primordial incubators would have offered water, energy, and perhaps a safe refuge from the meteors that bombarded newly minted Earth. In modern oceans, dissolved minerals emerging from the seafloor vents solidify into towering "black smokers," which are quickly colonized by chains of life feeding off chemicals rising from the deep. Some scientists think such life-giving volcanic vents might dot the ocean beneath the icy surface of Jupiter's moon Europa. Others believe something similar may exist beneath the surface of Mars. The problem with all those ideas, Holloway realized, was that nobody knew whether vents really are capable of brewing up the chemical hallmarks of life -- chemicals such as amino acids, the steps in the spiral staircases of DNA. Other laboratories had coaxed amino acids out of various recipes for "primordial soup," but as far as Holloway could tell, nobody had tested what happens when superheated water swirls out of the ocean bottom into the frigid, saline environment of the open sea. Studies of modem vents can't settle the question; it's difficult to look for primordial amino acids when organisms full of amino acids are running all over the place. "The problem with looking at the vents now is that all these creatures living there now are mucking up the system," Holloway says. "You've got to have them out of the way before you can look at the basic chemistry of what's going on there -- whether all the ingredients are there." One night at the meeting, Holloway was drinking wine and excitedly discussing these ideas with his friend John Delaney, an oceanographer and early-life researcher at the University of Washington. "So," Delaney remembers asking him, "are you just going to melt rocks until you die?" Instead of replying, Holloway picked up his conference program and sketched out plans for a model deep-sea vent. By the time the conference wrapped up (and after continued prodding from Delaney), he had decided to build it. Holloway's hot vent stands across the room from his fumarole. Like the faux volcano, it is built around a souped-up pressure cooker, which heats seawater to about 750 degrees Fahrenheit -- so hot that it would vaporize if it weren't under pressure. The water rises through a simulated seafloor, a corrosion-resistant titanium cylinder filled with chunks of basalt that Delaney's research subs have plucked off the real seafloor. Then it streams through a pinhole-sized opening -- the vent -- at about a foot per second, a typical speed for true seafloor flows, and winds up in a tank of cool seawater. It was a challenge to find seawater in Tempe, which lies in the middle of the desert, but Holloway solved that problem with a mix for saltwater aquariums. For the model's maiden run, Holloway cranked the vent up and left it overnight. The next morning, the inlet pressure had shot off the dial. The vent was plugged. But that was a good thing, Holloway explains. It meant that the basalt was dissolving in the hot seawater, yielding a chemical plume that might hold within it the ingredients for the recipe of life. It was also behaving as nature behaves: unpredictably, which may be the true mark of a realistic experiment. Now Holloway has the model running again. Inside the seawater tank around the pinhole, a tiny black smoker is growing, made of silica, quartz, and pyrite -- just like the real thing. The gases coming out of the model are right, too: the rotten-egg odor of hydrogen sulfide fills the lab. The next step, a big one, is to test the water in the tank for chemical harbingers of life. Using a gas chromatograph, Holloway's team has found encouraging traces of what "pretty much has to be a volatile organic compound," but identifying it will be a painstaking, time-consuming business. For all the time and care that goes into them, Holloway's experimental models will never be anything more than models. "We're not under any illusion that we can reinvent the world in a laboratory," Holloway says. "But if we're careful and if we're thoughtful and patient, maybe we can poke our nose into one little comer of it. The more you learn, the more you come to respect the real thing." RELATED ARTICLE: Smash It with Diamonds John Holloway isn't the only scientist building models of things too hot to handle in real life. There are others using the tabletop model approach to investigate incredible forces brought to bear on molecules that may have started life on Earth -- forces generated by a deep-sea geyser or perhaps the impact of a comet. Jennifer Blank, an experimental geochemist at the University of California in Berkeley, spends her days torture-testing organic chemicals like the ones that, billions of years ago, must have come together to carry out the mechanics of the earliest living things. That's important because some scientists think life may have started in the extreme heat and pressure of hot water vents in the deep sea. Others, however, have questioned whether anything alive could hang together in such natural broilers. To find out, Blank takes a drop of water containing organic molecules such as pyruvic acid, a chemical critical to the metabolic processes of life, and puts it into a cell, or chamber, in a vise made of two diamonds. Then she then tightens the diamonds down like bookends. Molybdenum wires as thin as dental floss coil around each diamond and, when electrified, heat the diamond cell to hundreds of degrees. To gauge the pressure inside the cell, Blank trains special light meters on tiny rubies suspended in the water. Then she zaps the rubies with an argon laser, which makes them fluoresce. (See "That Inner Glow,") The higher the pressure, the more energy the rubies emit. Heat tends to break organic molecules apart. But Blank has learned that high pressure can put them back together again. She has found that some molecules shatter, but then, in a sort of molecular evolution, recombine into other larger and more complex molecules. Now Blank is working with geophysicist Gregory Miller to simulate even more extreme conditions: those wrought by the colossal impacts of ancient comets. If organic molecules didn't come out of the sea, some researchers suspect they arrived here as passengers on these giant balls of ice. According to some calculations, a comet crash would generate temperatures of thousands of degrees. Could organic molecules survive? Or perhaps the temperatures aren't so high after all. The pair plans to create artificial comets -- snowballs laced with organic chemicals -- and shoot them with a special gun Miller maintains in the subbasement of his building at the University of Chicago. The gun, forty feet long and just over three inches in diameter, is usually used to blast rock samples up to temperatures and pressures found in Earth's mantle, hundreds of miles underground. Miller and Blank plan to fire a metal plate at their makeshift comets and see whether any organic chemicals survive. They have begun test-firing the gun at mock-up comets. Their biggest challenge now is to build a sealed shell for the high-impact snowballs that won't rupture when struck by a flat-nosed bullet going five thousand miles per hour. RELATED ARTICLE: Breaking Up the Biosphere First the tropical birds -- emerald-throated hummingbirds and blue finches -- began dying. All seven species of frogs disappeared. Tropical forests declined. The coral reef started to dissolve. Greenhouse gases rose out of control. The most ambitious environmental modeling experiment ever attempted was in trouble. The place was Biosphere 2, intended to be a self-sustaining, glass-enclosed, three-acre model of Earth constructed by Texas billion-aire Edward Bass for somewhere around $200 million in the Arizona desert north of Tucson in 1990. While experimentalists like John Holloway study regions of the planet by modeling their components, the people behind Biosphere 2 planned to do the opposite: investigate the pieces by building a simplified whole. Unfortunately, it wasn't long before the pieces began falling apart. Overseers abandoned the project's lofty aims of self-sufficiency when they installed (secretly at first) scrubbers to remove the greenhouse gas carbon dioxide. They also injected fresh air to rejuvenate the initial team of "Biospherians" who had become light-headed when oxygen thinned to concentrations found at an altitude of 17,500 feet. A scientific advisory panel then broke up, and Bass fired top managers for financial mismanagement. Engineering an ecosytem, it now seems clear, is much more difficult than it looked. New Biosphere 2 has a new lease on life. In 1996 Bass agreed to pay Columbia University's Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory $50 million over five years to run the structure that Columbia's press releases now refer to not as an artificial ecosytem, but as a "research apparatus." Columbia has backed away from Biosphere 2's miniature rain forest, desert, and ocean and has instead parceled parts of the giant terrarium into bays where student and faculty researchers can gauge the effect of greenhouse gases in living, though managed, environments. Meanwhile, the species extinctions, failing environments, and skewed mix of atmospheric gases that doomed the original goals of Biosphere 2 appear to be showing up on "Biosphere 1" -- Earth itself. In a darkly ironic way, the great experiment in the Arizona desert might turn out to have been a successful model, after all. 

*
June 1998 v7 n3 p38(6). 
Title: Exploded mountain: Alaska's Aniakchak caldera is remote, sometimes violent - and beautiful. 
Author: Bill Sherwonit 
Abstract: A description of the Aniakchak caldera in Alaska is presented. The caldera was created 3,500 years ago when a volcano exploded and collapsed on itself. What makes this caldera so unique is that as a result of erosion it lacks ice, water and vegetation. 
Alaska's Aniakchak caldera is remote, sometimes violent--and beautiful. Bleak and blasted. It's hard to think of other words, looking out the window of a small plane flying over the mountain boundary surrounding the Aniakchak caldera. The peaks wall off Aniakchak from the green tundra that covers much of the Alaska Peninsula. The first glimpse of the caldera reveals a black, brown, and gray otherworld of cinder cones, lava flows, and explosion pits. It seems lifeless. Appearances, however, can deceive. Once on the ground inside this six-mile-wide crater, visitors are rewarded with belts of color and life, formed of scattered grasses and wildflowers. During the short, two-month Aniakchak summer, crimson rhododendrons, purple lupine, yellow arctic poppies, bluebells, and pink fireweed stubbornly hug the ground against the persistent winds that sweep across the caldera's width. Tucked into its northeast corner, algae-rich Surprise Lake harbors trout and a seasonal run of sockeye salmon. Terns and gulls nest in the lush marshes at both ends of the two-and-a-half-mile-long turquoise-colored lake. Brown bears feed on the salmon in late summer and early fall. An occasional caribou roams the crater's expansive flatlands, and bald eagles roost on the caldera's rim. One rarely seen species is Homo sapiens. The caldera, the standout feature of the 580,000-acre Aniakchak National Monument and Preserve, is some 425 difficult miles southwest of Anchorage. Fewer than twenty people a year camp inside it, drawn by a harsh yet beautiful landscape and the power of a once-awesome volcano. Although dormant since 1931, the caldera is part of the Pacific's "rim of fire." It was created about 3,500 years ago after a volcanic mountain, possibly 7,000 feet high, exploded and then collapsed on itself, forming the bowl-like caldera. Aniakchak is different from most other calderas -- Oregon's Crater Lake comes quickly to mind -- because its features aren't covered by ice, water, or vegetation. Erosion long ago worried a notch into the caldera's rim that allowed water to drain away; today, the Aruakchak River runs through the notch on its way to the Pacific. An estimated three to seven cubic miles of gas-rich molten rock and ash spewed out of the ground in just over four days from a magma chamber located close to the surface. The eruption was far larger than that of Mount St. Helens, says Tom Miller of the U.S. Geological Survey's Alaska Volcano Observatory; that volcano sent out less than a cubic mile of the hot stuff in 1980. Roaring down the mountain at speeds up to one hundred miles per hour, Aniakchak's molten flood wiped out everything in its path for a distance of thirty-five miles, while its cloud of ash and gases covered an area of more than 2,500 miles. "Undoubtedly, ash from the eruption circled the globe," says Miller. "We've traced deposits almost to the North Slope," some nine hundred miles away. More than twenty major eruptions have occurred since that first monster explosion. One of the caldera's principal features, 3,300-foot-tall Vent Mountain, is a spatter cone that formed by "blobs of molten material spitting out" during one of these eruptions, Miller says. Explosion pits, hardened lava flows, and cinder cones reveal other major volcanic episodes. The last blast, in 1931, deposited ash on villages forty-five miles away and left a five-mile-wide mass of pumice floating in Bristol Bay, fifty miles north of the volcano. Today, Aniakchak's remaining rim rises 3,300 feet above the crater floor. Evidence of current geothermal activity includes the hot, mineral-rich springs near Surprise Lake, which bubble out of the ground at a scalding 185 degrees Fahrenheit. Near the 1931 blast site, ground temperatures still approach 175 degrees. Indeed, Jesuit priest and geologist Bernard Hubbard described the caldera as a "valley of death" after exploring the area a month after that blast. But in the sixty-six years since the explosion, the scorched earth has slowly undergone a transformation by a stubborn array of plant and animal life. Nearly 500 species of plants have repopulated the caldera, including some 250 species of mosses and lichens. It isn't just Aniakchak's remote location that keeps people from witnessing life's resurgence. It's the weather. The Alaska Peninsula is prone to violent storms. Surging out of the southeast across the Bering Sea, rain-soaked clouds slam against the caldera's walls, sweep up the side, then cascade down the interior face; park rangers call it the "Niagara effect." They warn that Aniakchak can have violent winds and heavy rams even when the weather outside the caldera is relatively calm. Linda Hasselbach, a botanist who has studied the crater's botanical diversity, knows Aniakchak's violent nature firsthand. During a ten-week stay one summer, she and her colleagues were buffeted by four major storms. They were pelted by three inches of rain and seventy-mile-per-hour winds that shredded their supposedly rugged mountaineering tents. "It was frightening," she recalls, "but also wonderful to experience the caldera's different moods." That kind of experience, say the hardy few who visit, is worth the trip inside the rim. 

<#FOC>
*
A to Z of volcanoes
Hot-tempered and unpredictable, volcanoes can be dangerously fascinating. Sarah Barnett reveals what's bubbling away beneath the Earth's fragile crust, just waiting for a chance to escape.
A is for ash
The 1,000°C lava is not necessarily the most dangerous thing associated with a volcano. One of the most disruptive aspects of any eruption is volcanic ash, which can be carried on the wind for thousands of kilometres. It poses a major problem for aircraft, because the ash rapidly clogs their engines. Dozens of planes have suffered damage or even crashed after flying into eruption columns. Apart from the problems of inhalation, accumulation on buildings, water contamination, destruction of crops and damage to power lines, ash can linger in the Earth's atmosphere and have a long-term influence on the global climate.
B is for bombs
Volcanic bombs are clots of lava ejected from a volcanic vent which then solidify in flight. " Sometimes measuring several metres across, they can take various shapes, including spindles (formed as they spin and cool in mid-air),
fine ribbons, or even cow pats.
C is for cryovolcanism. 
It's hard to imagine cold volcanoes but, on some bodies in the outer Solar System, icy eruptions are, or have been, the norm. Images sent back to Earth from the Voyager and Galileo probes have revealed smooth surface textures on moons such as Enceladus (Saturn) and Europa (Jupiter) that could only have been caused by volcanism. On such cold worlds, ice and slush would have been erupted, not lava.
D is for the Deccan Traps
The Deccan plateau in India covers 250,000 square kilometres and is a 65 million-year-old reminder of one of the most devastating eruptions ever. The basalt rock that covers it is the result of an eruption of extremely fluid and mobile lava from fissures in the planet's crust, called a flood basalt. The Deccan Traps would certainly have had a big impact on the Earth's climate, possibly contributing to the demise of the dinosaurs.
E is for eruptions
Eruptions are rated in order of explosivity, and are named after typical volcanoes: Hawaiian-type eruptions are characterised by very fluid lava; Strombolian ones are more gaseous; Vulcanien eruptions are viscous with large amounts of ash; the most feared are Plinian-viscous and gas-rich, ejecting a huge amount of pyroclastic material.
F is for fumaroles 
These are vents in the crater or on the flanks of a volcano, which emit hot gases. Caused by magma heating groundwater, their temperature can reach 1,000°C. Volcanologists sometimes take samples of fumarole gases, as the detection of a decrease in sulphur can be an early warning sign that an eruption is imminent.
H is for hot spots
Hot spots are plumes of ultra-hot material in the mantle, from where magma flows into the crust. The motion of a tectonic plate over a static hot spot forms a chain of volcanoes, such as Hawaii or the Canaries. Volcanoes form as the plate passes over a hot spot and become inactive once it's clear of it.
I is for Io
Io, one of Jupiter's largest moons, is the most volcanically active object in the Solar System. The huge tidal forces between this moon and its planet result in an ever changing landscape blanketed by eruptions. Io, which is roughly the size of our moon, bas around 300 volcanoes, some of which spew sulphurous lava to a height of nearly 300km.
J is for jokulhlaup
This Icelandic word means `glacier-burst' and is the result of a volcanic eruption beneath an ice-cap that lies in a crater. The result of such huge heat breaking up the ice causes a colossal deluge of water. When Katla volcano erupted in Iceland in 1918, the flooding had a peak of about 100,000 cubic metres per second. That's about the same rate of discharge measured at the mouth of the River Amazon.
G is for the Giant's Causeway
Giant's Causeway Northern Ireland's most spectacular tourist attraction is a prime example of 'columnar jointing' of a basalt lava flow. The mostly hexagonal columns were formed when lava erupted about 60 million years ego; it cooled, contracted and fractured. Around 37,000 columns extend from the cliffs of the North Antrim coast to the sea. But if you prefer to believe the legend, they were laid by the warrior giant Finn MacCool as a path to his lover, who lived on the Scottish Island of Staffa.
K is for Krakatau 
The tiny Indonesian Island of Krakatau was in one of the great sea lanes of the 19th century (the Sunda Straits between Java and Sumatra) and many a sailor passer] it by without much interest. But in 1883 it became much better known, when a series of huge explosions of the, island's volcanoes sent vast columns of ash into the sky, blocking out the sun for nearly two days. About two thirds of the Island collapsed into the sea, generating tsunami (tidal waves) that devastated the shores of Java and Sumatra, resulting in a death toll of 36,000.
L is for lava
To most it's just molten rock but lava comes in many consistencies and compositions. Lavas range from those poor in silica (which are called basalts)to those rich in silica (rhyolites) with several phases in between. Two of the most common kinds of basaltic lava have the Hawaiian names AA and pahoehoe. The former is a jumble of loose irregular cindery blocks: the latter is smooth, ropy and resembles cow pats.
M is for magma
Magma is the name for molten rock below the Earth's surface, before it erupts as lava. Magma is generated deep within the Earth's trust (or upper mantle) and tan pool to form an underground reservoir inside the trust, which may become a magma chamber beneath the throat of a volcano. The build up of pressure and gases in the magma chamber results in an eruption.
N is for nuée ardentes
When a volcano collapses explosively, it may cause a nuée ardente. This turbulent, incandescent gaseous cloud consists of a pyroclastic flow and ash. A notable example took place at Mt Peleé, on Martinique, in 1902. The 200-450°C flow raced along at 500km/h, killing nearly 30,000 people.
Q is for Olympus Mons
Towering 24km above the surface of Mars, this is the largest volcano in the solar system. It stretches 600km across. But unlike Earth, Mars has no plate tectonics so its lava built up on the same static spot, during the course of aeons. Olympus Mons has lain dormant for 500 million years.
is for plate tectonics The Earth's lithosphere (crust and upper mantle) is made up of several plates, which interact with each other. Volcanoes occur at subduction zones, where one plate plunges beneath another causing heat and friction, and at constructive margins, where the plates move apart and new crust forms
Q is for quakes
Earthquakes generally take place in the same tectonically active areas as volcanoes. When magma moves closer to the surface beneath a volcano, the surrounding rocks are put under strain and fractures occur. This, in turn, is what leads to tremors.
R is for Ruiz
The eruption of Nevado del Ruiz in Colombia, in 1985, illustrates how a Jack of monitoring and poor evacuation can lead to loss of life. The eruption was small and didn't kill anyone but disaster came when molten rock melted the ice cap and caused mudflows, which wiped out 23,000 people.
T is for Tambora
The largest eruption on record took place in 1815, when the top blew off Tambora in Indonesia, spewing out 50 cubic km of pyroclastic material. The peak collapsed to form a 7km crater and 92,000 people died.
U is for Unzen
Unzen volcano, in Japan, first made history in 1792, when the collapse of its dome resulted in tsunami that bit the shores of Japanese provinces killing around 14,500 people. It sprung back to life in 1991, when block and ash flows hurtled from the summit and 10,000 people had to be evacuated from the vicinity. This time, 42 people were killed, including several over-curious journalists.
V is for Vesuvius
Images of cowering bodies immortalised in stone make the eruption of Vesuvius in 79AD one of the most famous events in history. Pompeii, about 9km south of the volcano, was a bustling town with a population of 20,000. But disaster struck when Vesuvius unleashed clouds of ash, followed by pyroclastic surges (incandescent clouds of pumice and dust that race along the surface at up to 100km/h), which swept through the town. Pompeii was destroyed and nearby Herculaneum suffered a similar fate.
S is for St Helens In May 1980, Mount St Helens, in Washington State, US, decided to blow its top - big lime. After erupting a huge column of ash, steam and pumice, which developed into a mushroom cloud 70km across, the northern flank of the mountain was blasted off. unleashing pyroclastic flows and mudflows as ice melted. The eruption destroyed 250 homes, 300 km of roads and devastated large areas of forest. On a more positive note, there were few casualties in the sparsely populated area and the region has become a living laboratory for ecologists studying nature's remarkable recovery since the eruption.
W is for warning signs 
Although volcanoes remain fairly unpredictable, scientists can use various measures to help foresee an eruption. These Include monitoring earthquakes, which can become more prolonged in the run-up to an eruption, and measuring ground deformation around the volcano.
X is for xenolith
These chunks of mantle rocks can be brought to the surface via volcanic eruptions. Often sold in new-age shops, they are rich in green olivine and its gem-quality equivalent, peridot. Xenoliths can tell us the composition of the Earth's upper mantle.
Y is for Yellowstone
Famous to most as a breathtaking national park in Wyoming, US, Yellowstone is a huge caldera, 70 km across. It is the most powerful volcano ever to erupt on Earth: 600,000 years ago it spewed out 1,000 cubic km of material. And it's not extinct.
Z is for Zambales
This mountain range in the Philippines is home to Pinatubo, which gave vent to the third largest eruption of the 20th century on 15 June 1991. Ash rose 30 km into the air, and about 500 died, many due to it falling on homes which caused the roofs to cave in. The eruption coincided with a typhoon and the torrential rain and ash caused some of the worst mudflows ever. On the plus side, thousands of lives were saved due to prompt evacuations.


Top 10 active volcanoes
Bill McGuire, professor of geohazards and director of the Benfield Greig Hazard Research Centre at UCL, lists the 10 most active volcanoes. (Danger is determined by the number of people likely to be affected by a big eruption)
1 Stromboli, Italy
Continuous mild explosions and lava flows have been recorded here since Roman times. It's predictable, benign and attracts many visitors. Danger potential 1
2 Kilauea, Hawaii
The most continuously active volcano on Earth, Kilauea spews out five cubic metres of lava per second but is not considered that dangerous, having a hotel on the rim of one of its craters. Danger potential 2
3 Etna, Italy
Etna has persistent eruptions from Its summit and from fissures along its flanks. It's constantly monitored, but a big eruption could happen. Danger potential 3
4 Colima, Mexico
The Colima complex consists of two volcanoes, Nevado de Colima and Volcan de Colima. The latter has been the source of large debris avalanches and pyroclastic and lava flows. Danger potential 4
5 Popocatepetl, Mexico
Popocatépetl is North America's second highest volcano. It is covered in Ice and a large eruption could lead to mudflows that would engulf the heavily populated surrounding areas. Danger potential 5
6 Tungurahua, Ecuador
Historical eruptions Include sudden explosions and lava flows, mudflows and pyroclastic flows that reached people at the volcanoes base. Danger potential 4
7 Soufrière Hills, Montserrat
Soufrière Hills' first historical eruption did not take place until 1995. Ash and pyroclastic flows forced evacuation of the southern half of the island and destroyed the capital city of Plymouth. Danger potential 3
8 Merapi, Indonesla
Merapi lies in one of the world's most densely populated areas. Pyroclastic flows and mudflows have devastated crops and caused many fatalities during historical times. Danger potential 5
9 Semeru, Indonesia
The highest volcano on Java has been erupting almost continuously since 1967. Frequent small eruptions and pyroclastic flows and mudflows have damaged villages and caused deaths. Danger potential 3
10 Karymsky, Russia
Karymsky began erupting 500 years ago, after a 2,300-year quiescence. Eruptions have been moderate with occasional lava flows. Danger potential 1


Montserrat: a living laboratory
The Caribbean Island of Montserrat was once considered the ideal holiday destination. That all changed on 18 July 1995, when the eruption of the Soufrière Hills volcano resulted In half the Island being evacuated as pyroclastic flows threatened towns and villages. Now, as Soufrière Mils continues to erupt, the Island has been transformed into a 'living observatory' for volcanologists.
The Montserrat Volcano Observatory (MVO), mainly funded by the UK, was established soon after the disaster, and has helped Soufrière Hills become one of the most intensely studied volcanoes on Earth.
Dr Peter Dunkley, director of the MVO and contributor to the British Geological Survey, explains how Montserrat attracts volcanologists from all over the world. "Firstly, the Island is easily accessible," he says. 'Plus the eruption is prolonged, so researchers are keen to Install ' equipment for long-term study."
But isn't this work dangerous for the volcanologists? ' We only enter risky areas as a fast resort and we limit our lime there," says Dunkley. 'Much of the monitoring Is done by remote Instruments, seismometers, GPS, gas monitoring equipment and digital cameras, which send their data to the Observatory by radio. The only time we get close to the volcano is during maintenance visits.'
The team has gathered evidence which indicates that the volcano may carry on erupting for several more years, even decades. They are now beginning to recognise patterns of eruption behaviour and anticipate some forms of activity. The main hazards remain pyroclastic flows, explosions, fails of ash and volcanic mudflows, which are a high probability due to long periods of tropical rainfall.
But Montserrat is still considered to be a fairly sale place to live. The population resides outside an 'Exclusion Zone' set up around the volcano and has a good relationship with the MVO, which keeps the community Informed through regular radio interviews and bulletins, public meetings and school visits.

Volcanic ash may also linger in the atmosphere

Not just molten rock, lava takes various forms differentiated by the amount of silica they contain

The build up of pressure and gases in magma pools within the Earth's trust causes eruptions

Mudflows swamped homes but few died at Zamales.

Much of the Island has been evacuated but, thanks to MVO, Soufrière Hills bas become one of the most intensely studied volcanoes.

<#GEAL>
*
June 2000 v72 i6 p13. 
Title: Volcano project draws fire in France.(European Park of Vulcanology) 
Author: CH 
The massive `European Park of Vulcanology', France's "only great cultural project of the year 2000" according to former president Valery Giscard d'Estaing, hopes to attract half a million visitors a year to the relatively poor Auvergne region when it opens in spring next year. Like London's Millennium Dome, however, the `Vulcania' project continues to draw opposition from environmentalists, Green politicians and local residents, many of whom are concerned at the spiralling cost and likely impact of the centre. Despite protests, little of the centre will be seen at ground level apart from the cone-shaped reception area. Much of the 15,000-square-metre complex is being built underground amid Auvergne's extraordinary volcanic heart. On three subterranean levels visitors will be offered a virtual tour via giant screens and loud speakers of the eruptions of Vesuvius, Mount Etna or Mauna Loa, the world's largest active volcano, in Hawaii. Volcanic geysers, the movement of volcanic plates and lava flows will all form part of the `Vulcania experience'. Exhibitions will also explain the role and techniques of volcanic surveillance. [Graphic omitted]But getting the centre off the ground, or rather into it, has been a stormy ride. An alliance of environmental groups including WWF France, Amis de la Terre (Friends of the Earth), and Green politicians have opposed several aspects of the project. From the beginning they campaigned for a different location, not within the volcanoes, but on the adjacent plain or in a former quarry north of Clermond-Ferrand. Work was suspended for four months at the beginning of 1998 while technical aspects were reconsidered but the appeal court gave its final go ahead for the scheme. Although environmentalists lost that campaign, close environmental vigilance has ensured that the construction is being carried out using the latest eco-friendly techniques -- including vegetal fuel for earth-moving vehicles at around 9 [pounds sterling] a litre. The project's spiralling cost has also drawn criticism. Originally budgeted at 300 million francs (30 million [pounds sterling]), costs have since more than doubled, raising the wrath of local tax payers who also fear the influx of mass tourism the centre could bring. Detractors like to compare the park to the tackiness of Disneyland, while proponents prefer comparison with the home-grown and hugely successful Futuroscope at Poitiers. Neither comparison is entirely appropriate since `Vulcania' may have. difficulty in attracting return visits. Some fear the centre could simply become an overnight stop for tourists heading south. It remains to be seen if sufficient visitors will be prepared to pay a proposed 12 [pounds sterling] a head to give Auvergne the economic boost the centre's promoters hope it will provide. IT'S FACT Scientists estimate the rate of extinction of plant and animal species in rainforests, from human activity, to be 50,000 every year, around 140 each day. 

*
Nov 2001 v73 i11 p13(1). 
Title: Eruption would cause killer tsunami. (Natural Disaster).(volcano in Canaries could erupt) 
Huge waves, or tsunami, higher than any in recorded history, could hit Atlantic-facing coasts if the most active volcano in the Canaries over the past 165,000 years erupts -- and it could occur some time in the next 50 years. If part of Cumbre Vieja, on the island of La Palma erupts and falls into the sea, coasts directly facing it will suffer the brunt of the massive waves, despite being on the other side of the Atlantic. This is the frightening scenario proposed by Dr Simon Day of the Benfield Greig Hazard Research Centre at the University College London, and Dr Steven Ward of the Institute of Geophysics and Planetary Physics at the University of California. [Graphic omitted]The scientists reported that any future eruption on the geologically unstable, 2,000-metre-high volcano is liable to cause "catastrophic failure" of its entire western flank. Evidence suggests a huge segment, perhaps 15-20km wide and 15-25km in length, (perhaps 500 cubic kilometres), may collapse into the sea. Their computer model has predicted that if this were to happen, at an assumed 100 metres-per-second, giant tsunami would expand outwards in an arc greater than 180 [degrees], covering 250km in just ten minutes. Within 60 minutes waves possibly 100m high would then combine to hit Africa. To the west, waves would space out over 500km as they crossed the Atlantic basin, retaining much of their power. [Graphic omitted]Tsunami as high as 25 metres would reach Newfoundland and South America's northen coast after six hours. After nine hours Florida and the Caribbean would be hit by tsunami still 25 metres high and with the power to surge up to 15km inland. Closer to home, Britain, Portugal, Spain and France would experience waves of up to seven metres. Speaking to Geographical, Dr Day acknowledged that in one sense the computer model, which is corroborated by other international studies, is extreme. "It is a worst-case scenario in terms of volume of rock that could slide into the sea," he said. But he warned that a landslide faster than 100m per second was feasible. This would narrow the focus of the tsunami but increase their strength. As for when an eruption will occur, Dr Day said, "Based solely on probability, an eruption within the next 50 years is more than likely." 

<#NG>
*
Feb 2001 v199 i2 p131. 
Title: Red-hot Luck.(Tungurahua volcano)
Tungurahua was stirring, but clouds had blocked the view of the volcano for weeks. Photographer Pablo Corral Vega had traveled a hundred miles south of his home in Quito, Ecuador, to try to get a shot. Perched on a steep outcrop, he waited blindly. Suddenly the sky cleared. As he opened the shutter, glowing rocks and lava erupted with a roar from the blazing crater and rolled down the slopes. Almost simultaneously a thunderbolt backlit one side of the cone. "It was a real gift" he says. "The clouds covered the volcano again in seconds." Some 25,000 people living around Tungurahua were evacuated to safety. But in Quito 1.5 million live under the threat of smoking Guagua Pichincha (page 20). To illustrate the volcanic hazards of the Andes for Corral Vega's story, clear danger won out over beauty. 

*
July 1997 v192 n1 p58 (16).
Title: Under the volcano Montserrat. (Caribbean island)(Soufriere Hills volcano) 
Author: A.R. Williams 
Abstract: People living in Montserrat, a Caribbean island, hold on to their properties despite threat of another eruption of the Soufriere Hills volcano. Pillows of ashes still remain in the place as an effect of the 1996 blast, but people keep coming back to regain prosperity. 
GERARD DYER was harvesting his crops, a normal enough pursuit on a cloudless April morning on Montserrat. Half a mile above him, however, at the top of a peak buttressed by forested ridges, steam curled from fissures in a dome of gray rock. Gerard stopped to shake my hand, then turned right back to his work. Moving from patch to patch on ten sloping acres, he hoed sweet potatoes from long mounds of earth, pulled up carrots, picked parsley and tarragon. Satisfied that he'd taken enough, he loaded the produce into a battered pickup truck parked by the dirt track that led to the main road--our only escape from Soufriere Hills volcano. On Montserrat these days there's no telling when a quick exit might be needed. In July 1995, the year before I met Gerard, Soufriere Hills awoke after almost four centuries, throwing skyward a superheated cloud of ash, steam, and rocks in the first of a series of eruptions that would turn the lives of Montserratians upside down. "I was right here the first time it blow," Gerard recalled. "The rock come falling down, but we weren't scared. We just stay here and watch the ash drift" He gestured toward half a dozen other farmers bending over fields that checkered the mountainside. An abandoned stone sugar mill recalled an industry nourished by the rich volcanic soil in the 17th and 18th centuries. Farming, largely a subsistence activity today, has always been concentrated in southern Montserrat, which receives up to 80 inches of rain a year. Soufriere Hills has taken no lives so far, but its eruptions in the past two years have forced three evacuations of thousands of people from the south to community centers, churches, and schools in the sparsely populated northern hills. Families there have taken in relatives and friends, filling bedrooms to overflowing; foreign property owners have rented their vacation villas to locals who can afford the double burden of rent and mortgage payments on their own houses. The story of Montserratians and the volcano is a stern example of how humans, whose framework of reality spans mere decades, can be undone by forces of nature that play out over centuries, even millennia. Montserratians have no idea exactly what Soufriere Hills will do next. All they know is that suddenly, without warning, the rhythm of a life that seemed predictable was broken. The volcano has been reasonably quiet in recent months. But with no guarantee that it will remain so, evacuees are prohibited from occupying their homes and businesses in the south, designated as the unsafe zone. Some 4,000 Montserratians--one-third of the population--have abandoned their erstwhile paradise, most emigrating to other Caribbean islands. Others have gone to Britain, which still holds the 39-square-mile island as a dependent territory. Who can blame them? No sooner had the island recovered from the devastation caused by Hurricane Hugo in 1989 than the volcano struck. Hotels and restaurants closed down. Cruise ships skirted the island. A medical school that takes in students from the U.S. moved to St. Maarten. Unemployment rose from 7 to 50 percent. Making a difficult situation worse, Plymouth, the capital and only place of any size, with a pre-eruption population of 4,000, became a ghost town; it lies well within the unsafe zone, three miles west of the volcano. "The lifeblood of the country was there" said Midge Kocen, who helps run Montserrat's media center. "All the government offices and utilities, most of the shops and petrol stations, the post office, the cinema, the public market. Explaining all this to you makes me realize how much we've had to adapt" Montserratians are a people under siege, yet they're going about their disrupted lives with equanimity and determination. "We won't give up so easy. We'll carry on till we can come back to Plymouth," said Nigel Osborne, who manages his family's supermarket in temporary quarters in Old Towne. No less tenacious are Gerard Dyer and his wife, Judith. They've been staying with friends in St. John's, about as far north of the volcano as you can get. During my visits, when the mountain was judged quiet enough, people could get passes to visit the unsafe zone, which is how Gerard came to be working on the flanks of Soufriere Hills that bright morning. "If you have animals and crops, you can't just leave them," said Gerard as we walked back to his truck. "You have to come look after them and hope nothing happen." As he spoke, the volcano made a crackling sound like distant thunder--blocks of solid lava rolling down the side of the dome. Gerard didn't even look up. Montserratians have become so used to the volcano's huffing and puffing that the initial terror has gone. As one woman said, "At first when there was an ashfall, everybody run. Now when the ash falls, everybody look" Later I visited Judith, who was selling her husband's produce from a wooden shack about a mile inside the safe zone, where the road turns toward the villages that spill down a series of valleys on the northwest coast. On either side of us were tall palms, mango trees, and blossoming oleander bushes. Drivers stopped to buy a hand of bananas, a few cucumbers, a bag of succulent green squash called christophines, all displayed on wooden shelves and brightly colored plastic crates. Near Judith's stand a woman dished up pelau, a stew of chicken, rice, and pigeon peas, from a pot on the tailgate of her station wagon. On the other side of the road appliances were for sale in a makeshift store fashioned from metal-sided shipping containers and plywood. A house behind a hedge had become a branch of Barclays Bank. Judith said that as long as Gerard can plant and harvest his crops, the Dyers will get by. But there's always worry. "We're afraid they'll stop giving passes for us to get to our fields. I don't know what we'd do then," she said. I heard similar concerns often during two visits to Montserrat. Every time the volcano erupts, people talk of the fear, but the uncertainty of living under constant threat of an eruption is somehow worse, weighing on them day after day. "No one knows what the end is going to be," a former chief minister told me. "It's a sudden change from what was a very comfortable life." IT ALL BEGAN with Soufriere Hills spewing out occasional gray clouds of ash and steam. Soon after, the earth shook and mudflows raced down ravines. Then pyroclastic flows rolled down the eastern side of the mountain, turning a tree-shaded valley into a moonscape. Dense ashfall turned day into night. As the eruptions continue, Montserratian optimism has been tempered with hard reality, as people have come to realize that they won't be returning home soon. "If you'd told us two years ago that the volcano would behave like this, we'd have laughed," said Cedric Osborne, Nigel's uncle, who owns the Vue Pointe Hotel, the only one on Montserrat that's still open. Minutes before midnight on September 17, 1996, the volcano ratcheted up the action. Part of the dome collapsed, and rocks shot sideways out of the crater. Charged ash particles sparked lightning, thunder boomed, and for the first time pebbles pounded the southern end of the safe zone. Terrified, people in villages in the line of fire, such as Cork Hill and Salem, ran barefoot from their beds to their cars to escape the volcanic hail. The noise of the eruption carried. "I was up reading and heard what I thought was an airplane," said Colin Riley, who lives on the northern coast near Cudjoehead. "In 15 minutes there was a stream of cars passing by here. They pulled over and lined the roads all night." "It sounded like a war," recalled a man whose car windshield was smashed by the debris. "It could have been artillery shells falling around the house." The outburst lasted no more than an hour. A few houses in evacuated areas close to the crater were set ablaze by hot rocks, but no one was injured. Montserratians, however, were shaken. "I'm never turning my back on that volcano again," said Gertrude Shotte, a teacher, when we met at the Vue Pointe Hotel a week later. "I was one of the ones who spent the night in a car by the side of the road after those stones started to fall. We're getting the idea that this thing really can blow and affect us all." ON A SCALE OF ONE TO TEN, where ten is equivalent to the Mount St. Helens blowout in 1980, the Soufriere Hills explosion last September didn't even reach one. Steven Sparks, a British geologist from Bristol University--one of an international team of scientists working out of the Montserrat Volcano Observatory (a rented house in Old Towne)--doesn't think the volcano will ever escalate to a ten. "Traffic accidents are a good analogy" he said. "A ten-car pileup somewhere in the United States in a year is inevitable. A hundred cars, possible. A thousand, probably not. It's the same thing here." Most likely the volcano will go on throwing out ash and stones for years without making the island uninhabitable. Acting on this expectation, the government began the task of shifting human activity out of danger. Public services, roads, and utilities, all centered around Plymouth, are being established in the north, with the help of 37 million pounds (59 million U.S. dollars) from Britain. "The north of the island has not been affected by a volcano in two million years, so we've based all our contingency plans on that," Frank Savage, Britain's governor of Montserrat, told me one afternoon over tea. The hospital was an immediate priority, and the staff moved key equipment from Plymouth to a school in St. John's, where classrooms were converted into wards. The phone company moved nearby, building a compound of trailers on a tidy lawn. To provide electricity, two generators housed in trailers by the cricket pitch in Salem started up in mid-1996. Construction crews assembled wooden houses on dirt lots cut into emerald hillsides, giving some people hope of moving out of shelters. Engineers drew up plans for a jetty in Little Bay; cliffs there offer protection for supply ships coming in--or Montserratians leaving in a hurry, if it should ever come to that. Every day the scientists brief the governor, chief minister, and local officials about the status of the volcano. Decisions are then made about which areas are presumed safe enough to live in and which are too dangerous even to visit. The government aims always to have enough time to move everyone out of danger. "We have to have faith in the scientific advice and hope to God they've got it right" said Savage. In the evening Montserratians gather around their radios and listen to the volcano report, a ritual I observed at a shelter in the St. Martin de Porres Roman Catholic church in Salem. People are aware of the danger of another eruption, but frustration at having to live in limbo is building. "I think what's going to happen is going to happen, and we should all go home," said an elderly man in a golf cap, who gave his name only as Mr. Syers. He was one of 80 or so people evacuated from St. Patrick's to the church shelter. "What are they going to do--keep us out for two years?" Along with a dozen or so other evacuees, we were sitting on the church steps enjoying the cool breeze that blows in reliably at dusk. Reggae pulsed from a boom box on one woman's lap, and a mother nursed her baby. No one disagreed with what Mr. Syers said, but no one was eager to run afoul of the volcano either. "It isn't my wish, but the government says stay, so I stay," a man said. Inside the church, rows of cots had replaced wooden pews in the nave; downstairs in the meeting room were more cots as well as stacks of bags and suitcases holding clothes and the few personal belongings the evacuees could squeeze in. This is an uncomfortable way to live, but the people in St. Martin's, and wherever else I went, were nothing if not stoic. As Charles Daly, a taxi driver with time on his hands, said, "I don't believe in complaining. What's the use of that? You just make do" At the shelter I got to know a man by the name of Nat Davis, who said he missed his old routine. Sixty-seven years old and retired from his job as a handyman for the government, Nat was the bell ringer for the Anglican church in St. Patrick's. "Six in the morning and six in the evening," he said proudly. "But there's no one left to ring it for now." Nat said he had no good reason to stay on Montserrat, especially now. He was referring to Britain's offer of a two-year residence permit, and public assistance if needed, to any islander who could afford the airfare. Nat already had his ticket and would join 900 other volcano refugees in Britain. He planned to live with his brother Patrick, who had moved to London decades earlier. NAT TOLD ME he needed to make one last trip to his house in St. Patrick's, and I offered to drive him there. Just past Cork Hill we came to a police barricade in the middle of the road. I fished a neon green card from my bag. It said, DANGER. OFFICIAL PASS. HIGH RISK OF VOLCANIC ACTION: PERSONS ENTER AT THEIR OWN RISK. The officer waved us on, and we entered the unsafe zone in a swirl of ash. Nat's place was a two-story lemon-colored stucco house commanding a clear view of the sea. Chunks of pumice speckled the lawn and orange-tiled roof. A neighbor's goats, let loose to fend for themselves, grazed peacefully nearby. Behind us rose a mountainside whose covering of trees, scorched by volcanic gases, had turned a deathly brown. "We just finished building this" Nat said, leading me into a hallway tiled in gleaming gray. His three brothers--Patrick in London and two others in the U.S.--had all contributed money for what was intended to be a vacation and retirement property. In silence Nat busied himself, placing a few clothes in plastic bags, scouring the teapot, sponging the kitchen clean, and scraping the balcony clear of ash caked by rain. Then he began a real project. "My brother wife like her sugar-cake" he said, "so I'll make it and carry it to her" Sugar-cake, Nat demonstrated, is candy made with freshly grated coconut and light brown sugar. He cooked it for several hours the old-fashioned way--on a charcoal brazier, which Montserratians call a coal-pot. By now the afternoon shadows stretched long and thin. Nat locked the front door and nailed a sheet of plywood across the garage to keep out stray animals. "I'm not really sad to leave this" he said. "I'll be back someday." Two days later I watched him board an airplane without a backward glance. Two months after that the southwest crater wall of the volcano began to crumble, and the government put St. Patrick's completely off-limits. Unlike Nat Davis, Matilda Farrell, who came to Montserrat from Dominica 23 years ago, has no intention of leaving her adopted island, despite the urgings of her mother and grown son back in Dominica. "I come as a housemaid when I was 19" she said. "This is my home" Matilda used to have steady work pumping gas in Plymouth. Now marking time at St. Martin's, she takes what work she can find: a little ironing, selling car parts, making salt-fish sandwiches at a lunch counter. Like the others at the shelter, she relies on weekly government rations of basics such as eggs, macaroni, meat, and tinned vegetables supplemented by herbs and other garden ingredients. The kitchen arrangements were discouraging--one stove in the church basement, another in an outdoor shed, and a coal-pot--but Matilda created masterpieces nevertheless: kingfish and green bananas, chicken wings marinated in thyme and roasted, a moist cake made from sweet potatoes. I began filling my notebook with her recipes, complete with sketches of island staples such as dasheen, or taro, and tannia--brown, potato-like root vegetables she used to make soup. "You partake of some?" Matilda asked. The soup was delicious. The meat, falling from the bones of turkey wings, was tender and succulent in a broth thick with lentils and the satisfying starchy roots. We ate sitting on the church steps, side by side like sisters. When I asked Matilda how she coped with life under the volcano, she spoke of faith and gratitude. "We don't know when the volcano will do something. The geologists do the best they can, but they don't know either. Only God is in control. We can only pray that when the next event come, there is no danger to it. We still have to thank God that we have food and. shelter and friends" Faith is the islanders' bedrock. Most villages, no matter how small, have at least one church, and nearly everyone attends services dressed in Sunday best. Hymns ring across the hills from front porches at sunset, an outpouring of devotion that helps people accept the upheaval. "At first it really gets on your nerves, but then you put God first and everything smooth out" said Rose Anna Ryan, a nursery school teacher. For many, adapting to the new reality requires a leap of faith. Gertrude Shotte, the teacher whose nerves were jangled by the September eruption, taught at the primary school in Kinsale before the evacuation. Now she's teaching English, math, and social studies at the secondary school in Salem, helping fill in for teachers who have gone abroad. I caught up with Gertrude and Ann Marie Dewar, a biology teacher, between classes. "I just finished a class on Hamlet," Ann Marie told me, shaking her head. "No specialist here," said Gertrude, pointing to herself. She turned to me. "Have a good laugh. It's the only way to ease the tension" Montserratians seem to know instinctively how laughter can heal the soul. Telling me what people in the St. Martin's shelter did for recreation, Matilda said, "We play dominoes and give joke from the olden days. The laughter is there, and no harsh word." Children learn the knack of treading lightly through life's problems from their mothers and older sisters and aunts--the whole extended world of women that still shapes the family on Montserrat. One evening at the shelter a group of girls and boys cornrowed my short, limp hair while laughing at my blue "dolly" eyes. When I showed them the sketches in my notebook---their school, Matilda's vegetables, the new shops in Salem--they insisted on adding their own. Nearly everyone drew a volcano. Salem, which lies between the central heights and the sea, used to be a village--not much more than a few bars in brightly painted wooden buildings and a cafe that served gourmet sandwiches on a patio hung with potted plants. Now it's a small boomtown, with traffic jams and parking problems. The owners of a number of Plymouth businesses have moved here, in part because Salem is the nearest safe place of any size as you drive north. This is a big consideration if you're running a business and bringing in supplies via the jetty in Plymouth. Suddenly every square foot of available space in Salem was in demand. "It's very difficult to get land now" said Alfred Murraine, owner of the Golden Nugget, a restaurant known for its goat-water, the clove-scented stew that is Montserrat's traditional comfort food. Alfred had disassembled the building in Plymouth and was resurrecting it on a leased site next to the new bakery. "You see that slope?" he asked, pointing with his hammer to a deep gully. "That's why I could get this spot. Building here is hard." While Alfred and I talked, an electric saw whined behind us. Two men were fitting together beams and boards salvaged from the old place. They'd already laid the floor on pilings set into the gully. "Some people move temporary, but I'm permanent" Alfred said. "I can't go with that up and down." NOT EVERYONE has given up on Plymouth. "We're still hungry to get back" said one woman. "It has a hold on us." Walking around "town" as Montserratians call the capital, it was hard to imagine the place alive with people. I saw block after block of homes and businesses with windows shuttered, doors locked, walls dulled by the gray volcanic powder. Friday nights, I'd been told, were impromptu parties, with people crowding the streets as they ran errands and exchanged news. "Meet you at the Evergreen" they'd call out to friends, who would gather around a giant ficus tree that shaded a small downtown park. Mounds of ash now covered the park benches, and a gloomy silence filled the air. One day I accompanied Nigel Osborne on a trip from the Vue Pointe Hotel to the family's warehouse in Plymouth. He needed to restock their supermarket, now set up in what used to be a boutique in the hotel. "We haven't moved from town completely yet" he said, loading his pickup from a storage bay full of merchandise. "We still have hope." The Vue Pointe Hotel has become a virtual village. An insurance company and car dealership operate from desks in the mezzanine. The tennis courts at the foot of a hill dotted with hibiscus are a lumberyard. A dive shop near the perfect arc of a black-sand beach is a hardware store. All are Osborne family enterprises. The Osbornes believe they have an obligation to help others too. A hotel lounge called the Pelican Club serves variously as a courtroom, an auditorium for volcano lectures and gospel concerts, a hall for "stress buster" dances, and a chapel for Sunday Mass. Nigel's aunt, Carol, would have it no other way. "We're staying, no matter what. And it's not just because of the property we own here. We have a commitment to this island.'" Montserratians under siege are blessed with many things: a sense of community, perseverance, humor, resourcefulness. But of all the impressions I brought home from this charming, beleaguered island, none struck me more than their warmth of spirit. I was reminded of this when I stopped by the St. Martin's shelter on the way to the airport. Matilda Farrell was waiting for me. She gave me a big hug and a package of sugar-cake to carry home. RELATED ARTICLE: The Making of a Menace There's not much room to run on an island too small for even one traffic light, but about 5,000 Montserratians--nearly half the population--have been evacuated to the northern hills from villages surrounding the smoldering crater. In 1632 the first settlers saw emerald slopes reminiscent of Ireland, home to many of them, though Soufriere Hills had recently erupted. The volcano remained relatively silent until reawakening in July 1995. Under Montserrat lies the tectonic engine that drives the volcano: a subduction zone where the North and South American plates push beneath the Caribbean plate and form the islands of the Lesser Antilles. Rock at the edge of the subducting plates melts into magma, which then rises in columns. "It accumulates at depth and then blips its way up, sort of like a lava lamp," explains Geoff Wadge, a geologist at England's University of Reading. Between blips a volcano can sit quietly for thousands of years. As the magma rises to the surface, it forms a dome. More magma pushes against the dome, creating rockslides that expose fresh magma in a flash. "That's like pulling the cork from champagne," says Joe Devine. Gases in the magma expand rapidly and can fragment the magma in violent outbursts. VINCENT J. Musi photographed "Simple Gifts of the Shenandoah" for the December 1996 issue. 

*
May 2000 v197 i5 pXX. 
Title: Into the Volcano.
A fiery lake of magma sets aglow members of an expedition into the vast caldera of Ambrym, a volcanic island in the Pacific Ocean nation of Vanuatu. The story of this trouble-plagued foray led by photographer Carsten Peter appears on EXPLORER this month. "The molten earth rumbles under its own weight as it flows," says Peter, "and the ground quakes." Gases, lava projectiles, and rockfalls were a constant danger as team member Franck Tessier (inset) descended 1,500 feet into the crater. Just two months after the crew departed, a powerful earthquake struck the area, triggering landslides and a tsunami. 

*
Nov 2000 v198 i5 p50. 
Title: GOES TO HELL.(Ambrym's volcano)
Author: Donovan Webster
THE VOLCANO'S SUMMIT IS A DEAD ZONE, a cindered plain swirling with poisonous chlorine and sulfur gases, its air further thickened by nonstop siftings of new volcanic ash. No life can survive this environment for long. On the ash plain's edge, always threatening to make the island an aboveground hell, sit two active vents, Marum and Benbow, constantly shaking the earth and spewing globs of molten rock into the air. Yet across the black soil of the plain come all nine of us, a team of explorers, photographers, a film crew, a volcanologist, and me. We have hacked through dense jungles on this island called Ambrym, one of some 80 islands making up the South Pacific nation of Vanuatu, and entered this inhospitable landscape to camp and explore for two weeks. We've tight-roped up miles of eroded, inches-wide ridgeline--with deep canyons plummeting hundreds of feet on either side--to totter at the lip of the volcanic pit of Benbow. The pit's malevolent red eye--obscured by gases and a balcony ledge of new volcanic rock--sits just a few hundred feet below. "OK, your turn," Chris Heinlein shouts above the volcano's roar. A sinewy and friendly German engineer, Heinlein hands me the expedition's climbing rope, which leads down, inside the volcano. Clipping the rope into a rappelling device on my belt--which helps control my descent--I step into the air above the pit. A dozen feet of rope slips between my gloved fingers. I lower myself into the volcano. Acidic gas bites my nose and eyes. The sulfur dioxide is mixing with the day's spitting drizzle, creating a sulfuric-acid rain so strong it will eat the metal frames of my eyeglasses within days, turning them to crumbly rust. The breathing of Benbow's pit is deafening, like up-close jet engines mixed with a cosmic belch. Each new breath from the volcano heaves the air so violently my ears pop in the changing pressure--then the temperature momentarily soars. Somewhere not too far below, red-hot, pumpkin-size globs of ejected lava are flying through the air. I let more rope slip. With each slide deeper inside, I can only wonder: Why would anyone do this? And what drives the guy on the rope below me--the German photographer and longtime volcano obsessive Carsten Peter--to do it again and again? We have come to see Ambrym's volcano close up and to witness the lava lakes in these paired pits, which fulminate constantly but rarely erupt. Yet suspended hundreds of feet above lava up to 2200 [degrees] F that reaches toward the center of the Earth, I'm also discovering there's more. It is stupefyingly beautiful. The enormous noise. The deep, orangy red light from spattering lava. And those dark and brittle strands called Pele's hair: Filaments of lava that follow large blobs out of the pit, they cool quickly in the updraft and create six-inch-long, glassy threads that drift on the wind. It is like nowhere else on Earth. Our first night on Ambrym we make camp in a beachside town called Port-Vato at the base of the 4,167-foot-high volcano. Shortly after sunrise the next morning, at the start of a demanding hike up the side of the Volcano--walking a dry riverbed through thick jungle --I try to extract Peter's reasons for coming. As we crunch along the floor of black volcanic cinders, scrambling over shiny cliffs of cold lava that become waterfalls in the rainy season, Peter, 41, is grinning with excitement. Overhead dark silhouettes of large bats called flying foxes crease the morning sky like pterodactyls. "I was 15 years old and on vacation in Italy with my parents. They took me to see Mount Etna," he says. "As soon as I saw it, I was drawn to the crater's edge. I was fascinated. My parents went back to the tour bus. They honked the horn for me to come--but I couldn't leave. I edged closer, seeing the smoke inside, imagining the boiling magma below. At that moment I became infected." Since then Peter has traveled the-world examining volcanoes. His trips have taken him to Iceland, Ethiopia, Indonesia, Hawaii, and beyond. "And of course," he says, "I have been back to Etna, my home volcano, many times." Using single-rope descending and climbing techniques developed by cave explorers and adapted for volcanoes, Peter has been dropping into volcanoes now for nearly a decade. "The size and power of a volcano is like nothing else on Earth," he says. "You think you understand the Earth and its geology, but once you look down into a volcanic crater and see what's there, well, you realize you will never completely understand. It is that powerful. That big." He grins. "You'll find out what I mean, I think." After a five-hour walk uphill I get my first glimpse of that power as the expedition emerges from the steep, heavily vegetated sides of the volcano's cone and onto the caldera. In the course of a few hundred yards the trail flattens out, and the palm trees and eight-foot-tall cane grasses that lushly lined the trail behind us become gnarled and dead, their life force snuffed by a world of swirling gas clouds and acid rain. This is Ambrym's ash plain. Seven miles across, it's a severely eroded ash-and-lava cap hundreds of feet thick. Across the plain Benbow and Marum jut almost a thousand feet into the sky. To protect ourselves from the harsh environment, our team quickly establishes a base camp near the caldera's edge. Shielded behind a low bluff separating the caldera from the jungle, the camp stretches through a grove of palms and tree-size ferns, the black soil dotted with purple orchids bobbing on long green stalks. For the remainder of this first afternoon we set up tents and create acid-rain-tight storage areas. The camp is a paradise perched on the edge of disaster. As night falls, we eat chicken soup fortified with cellophane noodles and plan tomorrow's exploration, the volcano rumbling regularly in the background as we talk. After dinner we follow Carsten Peter to the edge of the ash plain and watch the vents light the gas clouds, wreathing each peak in ghostly red glows. "Look there," Peter says, pointing to a third red cauldron halfway up Marum's side. "That must be Niri Taten. Tomorrow we'll start there." All night long the rumbling keeps awakening us. Just a few miles away lava boils and the Earth roars while each of us--lying quietly in a flimsy tent--anxiously dreams of those swirling red clouds. Tomorrow night at this time, I resolve as I drift off to sleep once again, one thing is certain: It will have been a day like none I've ever had. In the morning, shortly after a sunrise breakfast, we strike out toward Niri Taten, several miles uphill. As we follow dry and eroded riverbeds toward the volcanic cones, a gentle rain falls. "What does Niri Taten mean?" I ask our local guide, Jimmy. "Niri Taten is a small pig," he replies. "A small mad pig. A crazy pig. A small pig that causes trouble to men." Haraldur Sigurdsson, one of the world's premier volcanologists, walks alongside me in the dry riverbed, examining sheer cliff faces. He points out strata of tephra, a mixture of volcanic material. By examining these layers, volcanologists can tell a volcano's level of activity. Larger and coarser tephra far from a volcanic pit means a more powerful volcano, since heavier matter is thrown farther as more explosive energy is supplied. It's true. The closer we hike to the craters, the more the character of the riverbed beneath our feet changes from silty black grit to charcoal-size stones--not unlike old-time furnace clinkers. "Each volcano has its own chemical fingerprint," Sigurdsson says. "Each volcano's mineral and elemental content is different because of the nature of the volcano itself: its rock and the shape of its vent. It helps volcanologists a lot in their study. "Like the Tambora eruption of 1815 in Indonesia," Sigurdsson says. "We've found Tambora ash by its particular chemical signature almost everywhere on Earth. One of that magnitude happens about every thousand years." The Tambora explosion is said to have given off so much ash and sulfur dioxide --both of which blocked and reflected sunlight--that 1816 was a "year without a summer" across much of the world. There was crop-killing frost throughout the summer in New England. In northern Europe harvests were a disaster. Suddenly, from two miles upwind behind us, Benbow gives a huge belch. We turn to look back. "Uh-oh" Sigurdsson says. "Ashfall on the way." Instead of the usual bluish white clouds of steam and gas, the plume issuing from the cone is heavy and black, trailing earthward in a dark curtain. Slowly it drifts our way on the wind. Five minutes later the ashfall finds us, covering our rucksacks, clothing, faces, boots, and ponchos with a sandy grit the color of wet cocoa mix. Under the ashfall we climb Marum, pressing forward through the dead volcanic soil for another hour. Each step takes us closer to Niri Taten, a crater that tunnels straight down into the basaltic rock like a massive, steaming worm burrow 200 yards across. As we approach, a rising wind and thick clouds of chlorine gas force us to pause and pull on safety helmets and industrial-style gas masks that cover our noses and mouths. Without them, between the flying bits of stone and grit carried on the 50-mile-an-hour winds and the thick clouds of gas roaring upward from the vent, time spent near the pit's lip would be painfully dangerous if not impossible. Even with these protections the howling wind and gas often force us to shut our eyes and suspend breathing until the heaviest gas clouds pass. We lean against the high winds, brace at the crater's edge, and look inside. Five hundred feet below, the vent's opening is obscured by rocky ledges. But if we can't see the lava itself, there is a consolation. Every inch of rocky surface inside the vent's cone is painted with color. Sunshine yellow sulfur coats some of the crater's sheer rock faces. Iron washes other sections of rock with flaming orange. Pastel green deposits of manganese glaze rock nearest the vent, like a carpet of immortal moss. Other patches of stone have been bleached white by chlorine and fluorine gases pouring from the vent. Besides the wind and dangerous concentration of gases, the edges of Niri Taten are too crumbly to allow safe descent. Anyone climbing down a rope inside the crater could be dislodging loose boulders, some the size of cars, that could crash on anyone below. Carsten Peter pulls out his camera and long lens--whose coating immediately becomes corroded in the noxious air. The howling gusts twice knock expedition members to the ground. After an hour it's decided that we should examine the Marum crater itself. "We can get two volcanoes in one day!" Carsten Peter says with glee. Our helmeted heads tucked down, we continue breathing scuba-diver slow into our masks for maximum benefit, and we push on. The walk to Marum's opening isn't far, but what it lacks in distance it makes up for in danger. No matter which route you choose, you have to traverse the mountain's steep slopes, many of which are gouged with deep, unclimbable erosion gullies. We decide to cross where the gullies are smallest: along Niri Taten's knife-edged lip, within a foot of a sheer drop into the crater. We step gingerly where the slope looks most reliable, but our footing remains dangerously slick. The slope's top layer is crumbly tephra, sometimes as big as charcoal briquettes. Making things more difficult, we've moved downwind of Niri Taten. All around us clouds of sulfur dioxide, chlorine, and fluorine gases swirl so thick they sometimes obscure our vision and force us to stop and bury our gas-masked faces inside our arms for extra protection. It's a slog. Minutes stretch into an hour. Every step could be our last. Finally we reach the summit of the crater's edge and begin down its other side. Protected by the lip behind us, the environment changes. Sunshine blankets the tilting black ash, and the cold gales calm into balmy breezes. Two expedition members, Franck Tessier and Irene Margaritis, hustle downslope with me toward Marum. As we approach its lip, the 39-year-old Tessier--a genial and easygoing French biologist with impressive rope and rock-climbing skills honed by years of adventures like this one--rips off his gas mask and begins to hoot with pleasure. I know why. Ahead of us Marum's volcanic pit stretches as open and clear as a visionary's painting. In the pit, three step-down ledges--each deeper and wider than the one uphill of it--are marbled with layers of black ash and pale, bleached basaltic andesite. The layers of lava inside the vent form as a crust over a cooling lava lake that gets blown out like a massive champagne cork when volcanic activity resumes. Small wall vents called fumaroles--created where heated groundwater and escaping volcanic gas reach the surface--let off steady plumes of steam. Inside Marum's crater it looks as if the world is being born. And there, in the bottom of the third and largest pit --some 1,200 feet below--sits the lava lake. Its fury pushes lava through three skylight holes in a roof that partly covers the lake like a canopy. Bright orange-and-red spatters fly unpredictably from the circular opening of the largest skylight, a hole perhaps 50 yards across. Lava is three times as dense as water. Despite its up to 2200 [degrees] F heat, lava moves, burbles, and flies through the air with the consistency of syrup. Every few minutes huge molten blobs seem to soar in slow motion. A second or two later a noise from beneath the earth --a rumbling booooom--fills the pit and rolls across the sculpted ash plain beyond. It's mesmerizing: lava sloshing back and forth, bubbles emerging and popping like a thick stew. As we survey Marum's lip and crater, I can t. take my eyes off the lava. Suddenly I understand Peter's obsession. As evening cloaks the pit's deepest recesses in shade, the lava lake and explosive bubbles glow more seductively. The spatterings glisten like enormous, otherworldly fireworks as they sail through the shadowed air. Dangling inside Benbow's crater the following afternoon, I have time to reflect. This morning we followed the narrow ridge to Benbow's pit--which was firm enough to climb down. We fixed our rope, ate lunch in a spitting acid rain, and began our descent into the volcano. Now, on the rope below me, Carsten Peter works his way deeper inside the crater. I let more rope slide through my hands, easing myself deeper as well. With each drop the air shakes more violently; the clouds of poison gas grow thicker. Waves of pressurized air rumble past me. Grasping the rope tightly, I halt my descent at the edge of an overhung cliff and stare deeper inside. The lava lake waits below, ejecting orange bombs and smaller drops. Then, in a heartbeat, a wall of thick clouds blows between me and the pit, enveloping everything around me in a world of gray. In the shuddering air and disorienting noise, gravity, direction, and time seem to fade away. There is only the volcano, its existence a direct result of two tectonic plates colliding below me. Benbow roars again. The earth shakes. In this moment I know I've gotten close enough to the fire at the center of the Earth. At that same second the clouds part and Benbow reappears. Fumaroles smoke, and steam swirls from the pit's walls. The Technicolor wash swarms around me like a kaleidoscope. Below, Carsten Peter hits the end of the rope just above Benbow's explosive vent. He pulls a camera from his bag and lifts it to his eye. Torrential rains will frustrate another attempt to explore Benbow. Then dissension breaks out among some of the expedition's porters who helped carry gear up the volcano's steep cone, and it becomes clear that the team will have to leave Ambrym as soon as possible. In a last-ditch, 18-hour marathon, team members drop 1,200 feet into Marum and photograph its lava lake nonstop. They emerge from the crater and find a fractious camp. Jimmy cannot persuade the disgruntled porters to bend, and the tension escalates. With a satchel full of photographs, a few of which are printed here, Carsten Peter finally agrees to abandon the volcano--even as he vows to return. SOCIETY GRANT This Expeditions Council project is supported by your Society membership, 

*
vol. 182 n°6, December 1992.
Volcanoes - Crucibles of Creation.
By NOEL GROVE NATIONAL GEOGRAPHIC SENIOR WRITER.
Photographs by ROGER H. RESSMEYER STARLIGHT.
DARKNESS CAME AT MIDAFTERNOON as my taxi crawled through Manda traffic. The driver flicked on headlights that glared off the wet et pavement ahead. I had come to the Philippines to see an erupting volcano, but the explosions from Mount Pinatubo were 55 miles northwest of the capital. Surely, I thought, this murk must be the work of Typhoon Yunya, crossing this hapless Island of Luzon at the same time. But when I reached the Philippine Institute of Volcanology and Seismology, Director Raymundo Punongbayan instructed me on the wide-reaching power of volcanoes. "The typhoon brought clouds and rain, but volcanic ash from Pinatubo caused this darkness. The eruption today may be one of the greatest on record."
Satellite images and measurements of tephra, the solid material ejected by volcanoes, would prove him right. On June 15, 1991, the 5,770-foot mountain became a monstrous cannon, firing a shot with effects felt around the world. Sulfur dioxide was blasted 25 miles into the stratosphere, where it combined with moisture, creating a thin aerosol cloud that would girdle the globe within 21 days. Scientists, measuring the depth of the cloud by satellite observation, would calculate that 2 percent of the incoming sunlight would be deflected from the earth, leading to slightly louver temperatures, on average, around the globe.

The volume of tephra hurled from Pinatubo, two cubic miles of material pulverized to a fine ash, could bury the District of Columbia to a level of 150 feet. But ash was not the only problem that day in Manila. Around 7 p. m. earthquakes hit. The exit of lava from the mountain had left a subterranean cavern that began falling in on itself, causing shocks. In the capital, light fixtures swayed overhead and chairs felt as uncertain as liquid. Ash fell like powdery beige snow. To keep grit from their eyes, pedestrians walked the streets with plastic bags stretched over their heads, pressing their noses sideways and giving them a macabre Halloween look.
Darkness in daytime, ash from the sky, ghoulish pedestrians, and a trembling earth. "Like the end of the world," murmured one Manilena. I made my plans to drive toward the mountain the next morning.
The PHILIPPINES were among my first stops on a global survey of volcanism, that mysterious force that reminds us of our planet's molten past and present and touches some prima) fear within all of us. Much about this force remains elusive, taunting. But in the part decade scientists have gained new understanding of the dynamics of eruption. They have been surprised by the individuality of volcanoes and found them to be even more unstable than thought, sometimes collapsing in huge landslides. They have been able to track the movement of magma underground. And they are now able to predict eruptions with increasing accuracy thereby saving Bues. Pinatubo, I would learn, was an example of this ability to predict.
With morning I headed north. A panicky phalanx of vehicles - automobiles, dump trucks, bicycles - streamed toward me on both sides of a highway covered with ash. Near the town of Angeles, 15 miles from the volcano, I talked with a family walking hurriedly, carrying bundles of clothes.
"Rocks this big are falling from the sky," said the young mother, tracing a grapefruit-size circle in the ash with a bare toe. "And mud flowed into our house!"
Although the blast transforms much of a volcano's liquid rock into ash, sometimes frothy lava is blown aloft and cools into clumps of sharp-edged pumice. These were the falling rocks she described. As for the mud, heavy rains can loosen the tons of ash dumped on the shoulders of a volcano. Then a cement-like slurry roars down streambeds in town-burying torrents called lahars.
A few miles farther I came to a barren landscape a mile wide where a lahar had swept across the road the previous night. The sludge had snapped power-fine poles, obliterated fences and vegetation, and swept cars into a nearby field. Elsewhere pyroclastic flows - killer clouds of hot gases, pumice, and ash traveling at speeds as high as 80 miles an hour - had rolled across the countryside. The damage and death would continue as more lahars roared down the dopes without warning.
In the village of San Antonio that evening someone directed me to a boarding-house operated by a woman named Carolyn. Lodging seemed unlikely when I arrived; refugees were streaming into the two-story frame structure and arranging bedding on the flat roof.
"We wouldn't think of charging them anything," said Carolyn, with a wave of her hand. "Everyone is just trying to get by."
The eruption was a nightmare, she said, the darkness pierced by strange-colored lightning . . . blue, green, even red. Silicates in the ash cloud may have caused the light show, refracting different shades of the color spectrum. And now, continua) earthquakes. "I worry about the house," she said. "It's not solid." After Carolyn's nephews generously gave up their second-story bed for me, I worried too. A quake around midnight made the house sway and creak. I heard the rooftop boarders murmuring in alarm. When another, stronger jolt came later, I woke to the sound of someone yelling and suddenly realized that it was me. The next day I joined a team of volcanologists heading toward Pinatubo. Five miles from the volcano we stopped to reconnoiter, standing in the rain on an almost featureless plain of gray, soaked ash. Around us rose pillars of steam, remnants of the deadly pyroclastic flows that had surged from the volcano. "It's there," said one of the team members, pointing toward a foggy grayness, "only it's hidden by clouds."
Tension hovered as thick as the fog as we continued toward the monster. But now the two days of driving in heavy ash burst the radiator of my four-wheel-drive vehicle. Almost gratefully I turned back, refilling the radiator from puddles of rainwater until it could be patched at the next town.
Pinatubo's toll: 42,000 houses destroyed, 100,000 acres of cropland swamped by ash, billions of dollars in economic losses, and nearly 900 dead. But the toll would have been greater had the mountain not been monitored and the eruption predicted. Some 200,000 people evacuated dangerous areas. I turned now to examining how the scientists had been able to get warning of the blast a month in advance.
Before 1991 Pinatubo had slept for centuries, the last eruption occurring about 600 years ago. The first hint of trouble came on April 2, when villagers noted small steam induced explosions from vents on the mountainside. Scientists from the Philippine Institute of Volcanology and Seismology responded immediately and were joined in time by a team from the U. S. Geological Survey (USGS).
Seismometers were installed to measure movement under the mountain, tiltmeters to discern any bulging in the mountainsides. Airborne instruments analyzed escaping gases for sulfur dioxide. (A tenfold increase in sulfur dioxide in late May showed that juvenile magma was rising toward the surface -a danger sign. )
Field surveys and aerial photographs meanwhile revealed thick pyroclastic deposits ten miles from the volcano; this indicated that its eruptions in the part had been very violent, and this one was likely to be the same.
By June 11 ash emission and the doubling in size of the mountain's lava dome signaled an imminent explosion. The radius of evacuation was extended from the immediate vicinity to 15 miles.
The various monitoring devices were linked by telemetry to computers at Clark Air Base, then a U. S. facility. "There are no magic new machines," Paul Okubo, a USGS seismologist, told me, "only steady improvement in using what we have." The computers were a key - handling vast amounts of information quickly and merging it to form clear three-dimensional images on the screens.
One scientist remembered how tiny dots representing seismic jolts would appear on the computer screen, each heralded by a tiny blip sound. At first the dots were infrequent and at the fringes of the mountain. Then more dots appeared, rushing toward the lava vent, until the blips became an almost constant squeal - the volcano erupting!
With that blast, seismic systems became saturated, and scientific stations were either engulfed or had their telemetry links broken. They would be replaced in the following months, and in the summer of 1992 new pulses would threaten more eruptions. A year after the first explosions, seasonal rains sent more killer lahars roaring out of the uplands.
WE HUMANS have lived and died and been disrupted by volcanoes throughout history. In ancient tunes the natural phenomenon merged with myth, drawing its name from a Roman god, Vulcan, ruler of fire, forge, and hearth.
The first well-recorded eruption was that of Vesuvius in A.D. 79. It buried the Roman towns of Pompeii and Herculaneum on the Bay of Naples, killing 16,000 people.
The deadliest in historic tunes appears to have been Tambora in Indonesia: Its 1815 eruption claimed 92,000 lives. Twelve thou sand died in the blast; the remainder, their crops and livestock destroyed, starved to death. Tambora's aerosol cloud lowered temperatures so much that snow fell in the United States in June, July, and August of the following year; it is remembered as "the year without a summer."
Other notable killers:
Krakatau, 1883, the Sunda Strait between Java and Sumatra. Created a tsunami a hundred feet high that drowned 36,000 people. The detonation was heard 3,000 miles away. Pelée, 1902, Martinique. Sent a hurricane of hot gases into the town of St. Pierre, killing 30,000. Only two inhabitants survived-one of whom was safely imprisoned in a thick-walled jail cell.
Nevado del Ruiz, 1985, Colombia. A tidal wave of mud swept down from the volcano, smothering and crushing 23,000.
There are some 550 known active volcanoes on earth and some 500 million people living close to them. A dozen or two of these volcanoes are erupting at any moment. Scientists believe Chat about a hundred of the world's volcanoes need intensive monitoring, and maybe 300 careful watching.
In selecting which volcanoes to monitor, the experts admit a weakness: "A long-quiet volcano could still take an area by surprise," said Chris Newhall, who led the USGS team at Pinatubo.
Reported volcanic activity has increased in the past century, Dick Fiske, a research scientist at the Smithsonian Institution, told me. "But this is doubtless because reporting is better. In fact, there's no evidence that volcanic activity is increasing."
We would not want volcanoes to disappear, for they provide the lifeblood that keeps our planet vital. Just as our blood carries nutrients that feed our constituent parts, volcanoes do the same for the skin of the earth.
Magma contains the major elements required for plant growth-phosphorus, potassium, calcium, magnesium, and sulfur. When it is extruded as lava that hardens into rock, the weathering process that moves the nutrients into soil may take decades or centuries. But when the volcanic material is blasted out as ash, the fertilizing process can occur within months.
In Papua New Guinea an eruption centuries ago inspired native legends. One tells of a terror-filled "time of darkness" followed by a time when "plants grew at a great rate and gave unheard-of yields."
It is no coincidence that Java, one of the most volcano-ridden spots on earth, is also one of the world's most fertile areas. Driving along the island's spine of mostly dormant cones, I wound along slopes stairstepped with jeweled fields of rice, alive with men and women stooping, planting, hacking with curved blades, or plowing behind mud-colored buffalo. "With adequate moisture they get three crops a year," said my guide, Sutikno Bronto, an Indonesian volcanologist.
Magma simmering beneath our feet also yields energy. It heats underground water, which is tapped by wells to warm most of the homes in volcanic Iceland. Natural steam drives turbines that provide 7 percent of New Zealand's electric power, and accounts for one percent of U. S. energy needs.
Geothermal energy could provide up to 10 percent of U. S. power, said Patrick Muffler of the USGS in Menlo Park, California. But there's a limit. The supply, like that of oil, can be exhausted. Some experts have proposed drilling to fracture deep, hot rocks and then pumping in water to make steam. "But we can't yet drill right down to magma and use the heat," Patrick said. "The drills would melt on the way."
We owe volcanoes  even more: They helped shape the lithosphere, the solid planetary crust on which we live. When the bombardment of earth by meteorites ceased four billion years ago, earth's surface began to cool, but radioactive decay kept the inner rock heated. As in a boiling teapot, heat currents carried lighter, gas-filled portions of the rock to the surface. There it sometimes melted and burst through the hardening crust as lava.
Carbon dioxide, water vapor, and other gases liberated by these eruptions hovered overhead to form earth's early atmosphere holding in warmth from the sun, bringing the rain that created oceans.
Persistent outpourings of lava have drawn new faces on the continents and paved the ocean floor with cold, volcanic rock. Iceland and the Azores, among other islands, were built up from the seafloor in a process that continues today.
Even when the deep-welling material does not burst through, it may contribute to the movement of earth's tectonic plates, 20 or so sheets of crust that move slowly-at the rate of a fingernail's growth-but constantly. By one theory, massive plumes of mantle material rising from the inner earth may be diverted sideways upon reaching the hard crust, creating currents that pull the plates apart and set them drifting. Wherever they part, magma rises to fill the gaps. Such a gap-filling created the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, the volcanic underwater chain that runs from the Arctic Ocean nearly to Antarctica. Probably 80 percent of earth's volcanic activity is thus hidden from sight under the seas.
"You can compare the lithosphere to the Arctic ice packs, constantly heaving, breaking up, resealing, then breaking up again," said Don Anderson, who specializes in early planetary history at the California Institute of Technology.
Where ocean plates collide with continental plates, the ocean crust dives below the lighter continental mass. Geologists debate what happens to the subducted crust after that, but many surmise that the subducting seafloor bursts back into our world as recycled volcanic rock. This would help explain the Ring of Fire-the area of active volcanism that rims the Pacific Ocean Basin and of which Pinatubo is a part.
Sometimes a puzzling hot spot of magma rises from deep within the earth, a blowtorch-like column a hundred miles deep. The Hawaiian Islands resulted from such a hot spot, they are the tops of a range of volcanic mountains built up from the seafloor by thousands of lava flows. The flow continues.
"TOURISTS ALWAYS WANT TO SEE the red stuff," said USGS geologist Tari Mattox as she led me along a stream of basaltic lava flowing from a vent in Kilauea. We were on Hawaii, the Big Island, formed from the tops of five volcanoes. The temperature of the red stuff was about 2000°F. It flowed like cherry syrup; then as it cooled it hardened into swirls as black as the ponytail spilling from the back of Tari's billed cap.
The lava's performance seemed neat, even elegant. But Tari warned that it could be dangerous. Some lava vanished into natural lava tubes, formed when the surface of a lava river cooled. "You can break through a tube if you don't watch for thin spots!" she said. We followed one tube two miles to the shoreline, where the lava poured out into the sea. Geologists call this a fire-hose entry.
Later Tari donned a heat-resistant balaclava and thick gloves to retrieve a lava sample from a "skylight, " a break in the top of one of the tubes. Laboratory analysis would determine the temperature at which it flowed, a clue to future volcanic activity.
Kilauea is the most studied volcano in the world. Recently seismologists were able to follow the movement of subterranean magma so closely that they could position themselves to watch it break through the surface. Hawaiian volcanoes pour out lava in rivers of pahoehoe (puh-hoy-hoy) and in a thicker version called 'a'a (Ah-ah). The ooze builds huge, rounded volcanoes shaped like warriors' shields. Kilauea's shield is 50 miles long, 15 wide. Its summit caldera - created when the volcano collapsed in on itself-is an oval-shaped depression measuring 2.5 by 2 miles.
The difference between an explosive volcano and a drooling one like Kilauea lies in the viscosity and gas content of the magma. Killer volcanoes hold magma that is thick and sticky, the gases under great pressure -so the magma explodes when released. Kilauea's magma, thinner and holding much less gas, effuses in fountains.
If Hawaii's volcanoes do not explode, they have shaken the earth in the past-with humongous gravity landslides. In the 1960s James Moore, then head of the Hawaii Volcano Observatory, took a careful look at a map of the seafloor off Molokai. This map, based on simple echo soundings, showed remarkable variety in depth. Dr. Moore theorized that the seabed was littered with huge blocks and that these blocks had once been part of the volcanic island and had slid into the sea. In time, more advanced sonar imaging proved him correct.
But he was astounded at the extent of the slides around all the Hawaiian Islands. "They include debris avalanches more than 125 miles long," he told me. "Some individual chunks are the size of Manhattan Island. One collapse 100,000 years ago caused a thousand-foot-high tsunami off the island of Lanai."
The avalanches are adjustments: When the build-up of lava gets too heavy and
steep for a mountain, part just slides off. Kilauea continues to extrude lava, and so the Big Island is growing-by 319 acres in the past six years. A major landslide should be expected every 100,000 years, Moore told me.
"But smaller slides occur during the building stage, and they can be dangerous," he added.
In 1975 the south flank of Kilauea slid 20 feet toward the sea after being jostled by an earthquake. To Fal Allen, then a 14-year-old Boy Scout camped at seaside with his troop, it was a horror never to be forgotten.
"The second of two big earthquakes came during the night," said Allen, now a Seattle brewer. "A wave eight or ten feet high rolled in, and I was dragged out to sea, mostly underwater. When the water calmed, I had to fight my way to the surface through branches and brush so thick I walked over them to get back to shore. When light came, we could see that the land had actually slid into the water, and the tops of palm trees were sticking out of the ocean." The tsunami drowned a Scout leader and a local fisherman.
HOT LAVA RARELY KILLS PEOPLE. It usually destroys only houses and other property that cannot be readily moved. An exception occurred at the volcano Nyiragongo in eastern Zaire in 1977, when two side vents popped open in the erupting cone. The weight of lava above caused lava to gush freely from the vents, and for a few hellish hours rock flowing almost like water engulfed villagers, their livestock, and wild elephants on the slopes. At least 70 people died.
Particularly lethal in eruptions are the pyroclastic flows (PFs), glowing clouds so hot they consume anything in their paths. PFs are formed by the collapse of lava domes or by blasts that blow out the side of a mountain or explode skyward, then fall back to earth and spread for miles.
In the spring of 1991 French volcanologists Maurice and Katia Krafft went to the town of Shimabara, Japan, to film small pyroclastic flows breaking loose from the lava dome on the peak of Unzen. There they teamed up with young Harry Glicken, a lanky, likable geologist who had moved to Japan to be near frequent volcanic action. On June 3 the three of them walked up an eroded valley partly powdered with PF ash. Japanese newsmen also clambered over the slopes.
From later reports we learned that a loud crack like the sound of a lightning bolt came from the mountain. Lava around the top - gray on the surface but red hot underneath - broke loose and fell down the mountain. The tumbling movement energized the lava into a fragmentized cloud of killer heat. The three volcanologists plus journalists, cab drivers, and farmers died instantly as the heat rolled over them. The toll: 41.Loss of Glicken and the Kraffts stunned volcanologists, a fraternity fascinated by what many call living geology.
"Harry was always so distracted by his science that he left trails of car keys, gloves, and tools on volcanoes," remembered former roommate Steven Brantley of Cascades Observatory in Vancouver, Washington. The popular French couple, a friend of theirs told me, once said they knew well the risks at volcanoes and were prepared for the possibility of dying on the slopes of one.
I arrived in Japan five days after the tragedy. An Osaka newspaperman, Satoshi Tsujino, offered to drive me to a view of the valley down which the killer PF had rolled. From what we considered a safe distance, about two miles, we looked at the talcum of PF ash. Then Satoshi decided to head back toward town.
Just as we started away, I shouted: "Look!" A gray ball grew just below Unzen's peak. We watched it blossom into a billowing PF cloud 200 feet high and race downslope. "I think ... we must go now," said Satoshi.As we sped away in his van, I watched the cloud bottom out at the foot of the mountain, glance off a slope, then climb a thousand feet in the air. Later, on a helicopter ride, I saw that the cloud had scorched spring foliage to a dirty brown and set homes afire.
ONE OF THE MOST DESTRUCTIVE forms of volcanic behavior has only recently received scientific attention. This is the collapse of volcanic cones - the phenomenon that littered the sea floor off Hawaii. The 1980 explosion of Mount St. Helens in Washington State served as a sharp reminder.
After centuries of sporadic ejections of lava and ash that built its scenic cone, St. Helens was jarred by earthquakes caused by magma moving upward-and the north flank collapsed. In such events the debris rolls farther than physics would seem to predict, perhaps fluidized by snow or groundwater caught up in the churning movement. Debris from St. Helens flowed 15 miles down the North Fork of the Toutle River. Thirty-five hundred vertical feet of material slid nearly 80,000 feet horizontally! The collapse was followed by a pyroclastic blast that scythed down trees 17 miles away. Some 60 people died.
"After St. Helens, geologists all over the world began to see more clearly the signs of previous volcanic collapse," Steven Brantley told me. One example of such recognition came in Mexico.
Smoldering Colima in Jalisco state is considered that nation's most dangerous volcano, but we know now that it is only an upstart cone growing out of the side of a previously collapsed one. Volcanologist Ana Lillian Martin Del Pozzo drove me up a winding trail to a huge half caldera, three miles across.
Colima covers part of the east wall; the south side lies open like a Greek theater. The main performance came several thousand years ago when the old cone collapsed southward, sending avalanche material almost 30 miles away.
"We believe there are cycles in which lava flows from inside the crater and is covered by ash in the explosive eruptions that follow," explained Ana Lillian. "This continues, building up the cone until it can't support itself."
Later we visited debris from the avalanche - chunks of rock hundreds of feet tall, standing like mini-mountains on the flat plain.
HE EFFECTS OF VOLCANOES are not restricted to people nearby, and their dangers are not limited to the earthbound. Jim Lynch of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration showed me satellite images of the dustlike smudge in the stratosphere from Pinatubo. "The lighter sulfur dioxides may continue to circle the globe for five years," he said. The results, along with lower surface temperatures and possible damage to the ozone layer: brilliant red sunrises and sunsets worldwide.
The lower and denser ash clouds from volcanoes pose a threat to jetliners because of microscopic shards of volcanic glass. Sucked into jet engines, they fuse in the heat into clumps that destroy thrust. Over the past decade dozens of planes have flown into ash clouds, which often do not show up on aircraft radar. Three narrowly avoided catastrophe.
In July 1991 volcanologists, airline representatives, and pilots met in Seattle to discuss ways of avoiding ash clouds. British Air ways pilot Eric Moody gave them a firsthand account of sudden power loss over Indonesia in 1982. Told with an impish twinkle and an airman's nonchalance, his story belied the horror of a Boeing 747 sinking seaward at night with 263 passengers and crew aboard.
"We were at 37,000 feet when dust came billowing into the cabin and I smelled sulfur. Engine four began to run down, and I shut it off. Then we lost the others, one by one. For the next 13 minutes we were the proud possessors of the world's largest glider."
The plane had flown into an ash cloud from Galunggung on Java; the occasional eruptions were well-known to local pilots but not to others. Moody and crew prepared to ditch at sea, all the while trying to restart the engines. Finally they emerged from the ash cloud.
"Around 13,000 feet number four restarted, then the others," he said. In the cooled engines, the glass coatings apparently shattered and thrust returned. The plane landed at Jakarta with instruments impaired and the front windows opaque from abrasive ash, Moody leaning to peer out a side window with his toe barely touching a pedal for guidance. Satellite cameras can track ash plumes, but the information is often slow in reaching airline flight-information systems. The Seattle conference concluded with a call for quicker worldwide alerts.
Given THE INFREQUENCY with which most volcanoes erupt, people who live around them can't just sit there worrying all the time," said Chris Newhall, recalling his work at Pinatubo. "Unfortunately, they want you to tell them just 24 hours before they should leave. So far, we just can't do that."
But scientists keep trying to sharpen the time factor. I found new techniques at work, including seismic tomography. This procedure, using X-ray principles, gives a picture of solid and soft areas 20 miles into the earth, helping unravel the puzzles of magma location.
And I found geologists continuing to sniff the gases of volcanoes, to take their temperatures, check their pulses, measure their flexing muscles, all for more knowledge and to safeguard against surprise explosions.
In Ecuador, geologist Patricia Mothes of the Geophysical Institute of Quito drove me 45 miles to Cotopaxi. Most volcanoes have a princely look about them; Cotopaxi is a Charlemagne of a mountain with a huge robe of snow around shoulders nearly 19,400 feet high. That snow could become a killer if an eruption heated the mountain unexpectedly.
"We know of three occasions since 1534 when eruptions melted snow and sent lahars as far as 200 miles," said Patty.
Her job is to help anticipate any new activity. On the lower slope of the currently quiet volcano, she set up a surveyor's theodolite and focused it on a palm-size reflector higher on the mountain. Locked on, she activated a small laser beam that leaped to the reflector and back, measuring the distance: 4,680 meters and 798 millimeters, nearly three miles. The distance varied less than an inch from measurements taken several months earlier. A series of such measurements indicated no dangerous swelling of Cotopaxi's cone.
No serious shaking either, reported her husband, Minard "Pete" Hall, a professor at the National Polytechnical School in Quito. In a laboratory at the school, Pete and his Ecuadorian colleagues watch the nervous needles on
seismic drums, receiving radio signals from a dozen or so seismic detectors implanted on and around Cotopaxi.To avert possible disaster, the couple has helped simulate emergencies with local civil defense groups. "We locked officials from six provinces in six different rooms and-by radio-described to them a scenario of lahars racing toward their towns. They had to initiate warnings and evacuate their people."
And the simulated result? Pete smiled grimly. "We lost a lot of people. We'll get better." Sheer numbers lead many municipalities to forgo practicing evacuation. Two million people live in and around Yogyakarta, Java, only 20 miles from the volcano Merapi.
An otherwise well-shaped peak, Merapi bears warts on its western face-lava domes. In 1969 a dome that measured six million cubic meters collapsed in a huge but expected pyroclastic flow. It missed the city and caused few deaths. But today's dome accumulations are twice the size of the one in '69.
Scientists at the Merapi Volcano Observatory in Yogyakarta are monitoring the gases seeping out, hoping to predict the next eruption. " H20 - water - is the main gas in magma, with smaller amounts of hydrogen chloride, sulfur dioxide, and carbon dioxide," said geochemist Mohammad Badrudin. "As magma rises, the proportion of water vapor decreases, and other gases increase-signals of possible explosion."
In the foothills I was nudged awake after midnight by a limber-limbed technician named Yustinus Sulistiyo for a hike up Merapi to sample its gases. A full moon brightened our 5,000-foot climb, tough enough without daytime heat. We reached the top at sunrise, then entered a steaming crater to check its temperature and snatch a bit of its sulfurous breath. Into a crack showing red just inches below, Yustinus inserted a thermometer that registered 1492°F-hot, but not volcanically feverish. Gases were then capped inside a bottle for later analysis.
Back on the peak I looked down perhaps a hundred feet to the lava dome, smoldering like an ominous fuse. Sharing the view were other climbers, drawn by the challenge of Merapi and the lure of volcanic power. To a Swiss woman curious about the steaming lump, I explained dome collapse and pyroclastic flows. "Really?" she exclaimed, a flash of concern crossing her face. "Should we be here?"
It was safe enough when we stood there in the summer of '91, but months later tourists would be warned off as Merapi oozed new lava that sent small PFs down its sides. A few daredevils scaled the mountain, I was told, to stare potential calamity in the eye.
WHERE SHOULD WE NOT BE? With volcanoes, we seem to play a sort of mental Russian roulette; why fly away, we think, when the killing danger may be years away? Why not climb Merapi where a lava dome has squatted for years without a serious collapse? Why not live at Campi Flegrei, a crowded residential area adjoining Naples, Italy, where the ground huffs and puffs like a beast breathing?
Campi Flegrei sits across the Bay of Naples from Mount Vesuvius, the destroyer of Pompeii and Herculaneum. The African and Eurasian tectonic plates still grind together below.
Prediction methods will undoubtedly improve, says Franco Barberi of the University of Pisa, one of Italy's leading authorities on volcanoes. "But for now, it is very difficult to make a decision about evacuating millions from an area perhaps for nothing.
"We have all these factors to look for - seismicity, deformation, gas changes - but volcanoes show individuality. We saw precursors to eruption at Campi Flegrei a few years ago; now it is quiet. We think the gases leaked out gradually."
Vesuvius itself remains a threat. Pliny the Younger described the great eruption in A. D. 79 that killed his uncle, Pliny the Elder. He wrote of panicked crowds fleeing as their carts were tossed about by earthquakes and remembered seeing "a
horrible black cloud ... writhing snakelike and revealing sudden flashes larger than lightning," Then came the rain of ashes and "the darkness of a sealed room without lights. To be heard were only the shrill cries of women, the wailing of children, the shouting of men." "Records show that from 1631 through
1944 Vesuvius never went more than seven years without an eruption," said Professor Barberi. "Now nearly 50 years have passed, and long periods of repose are usually followed by high explosivity."
How bad could it be, now that millions of people are living uncomfortably close to Vesuvius? With colleagues at the University of Pisa, Barberi created a computer model based on data from previous eruptions. Should the volcano repeat its A. D. 79 eruption, ashfall, pyroclastic flows, and mud slides would likely destroy 500,000 homes. Casualties, if no warning is given or preparations made: 200,000 dead.
DON'T FEEL TOO SMUG if you live in Scott City, Kansas, or Mendig, Germany. Both areas were touched by eruptions larger than Vesuvius or Pinatubo. The blast at Mendig, northwest of Frankfurt, occurred 11,000 years ago, leaving a giant hole in the ground and scattering ash from Sweden to northern Italy. The hole is now a pleasant lake, the Laacher See, plied by the rowboats of picnicking Germans. A bucolic scene-until engineer Klaus Schmidt walked me to the south-eastern shore to show me where the water bubbled with carbon dioxide and other gases from the magma beneath.
Near the lake, I descended into caves where miners in the Middle Ages carved lava for millstones. Thick, slow-moving basalts cooled in pillars, and the workers cleared away the softer material surrounding them, then sliced the pillars into wheel-shaped sections. Lava is still mined here, for construction material.
"Had you told the paleo-Rhinelanders that an eruption was coming, they would have said you were crazy, that none had happened for a long time," said volcanologist Hans-Ulrich Schmincke. "But the Laacher See sits atop the Rhenish Shield, a piece of old earth crust still being uplifted. One cannot say when or if a volcano will erupt again, but it remains an active volcanic area."
Our own Yellowstone Basin, where subsurface magma still heats up Old Faithful geyser, periodically has served up eruptions, the last 600,000 years ago. These dropped ash as far away as Mississippi. If clouds from Tambora caused "the year without a summer," what would another Yellowstone, ten times larger, do to food production? As Yellowstone erupts every 600,000 years or so, we're about due. Then again, it might not happen for millennia.
If not Yellowstone soon, where might the next major eruption be? I asked Chris Newhall, the Pinatubo veteran.
"I wish we knew. Possibly Iwo Jima." From Tokyo I hitched a ride on a U. S. Air Force plane bound for Iwo, largest of the three aptly named Volcano Islands, some 600 miles to the south. Three hours later I looked down on Suribachi, a 530-foot cinder cone that hardly seemed worthy of the prefix "mount." It was hard to believe that the five-by-two-mile patch of land connected to it was the site of one of the bloodiest battles in World War II, where some 25,000 soldiers - Japanese and American - died.
Today Iwo is inhabited by 150 Japanese airmen and 25 U. S. Coast Guardsmen who operate a loran navigation station.
The island itself is only a resurgent dome in the center of an old caldera six miles across. Jagged offshore rocks mark its limits. That volcano blew out more than 2,500 years ago. Now the island seems on the way to another blast. Magma refilling the chamber beneath it has elevated most of the island some 25 feet since 1945 . It is now rising about a foot a year.
"From radiocarbon dating of corals that died when they were raised above sea level, Chris Newhall had told me, "we know that the refilling has gone on for at least 400 years. It's the most restless caldera anywhere."
For further proof of active magma one need only enter the caves the Japanese Army excavated on Iwo as shelters against American naval bombardment. With U. S. Army Maj. Rick MacDougall, who had also boarded the plane for a quick look at history, I bellied into one and found it stifling hot and smelling of sulfur. Old bandages, medicines, and vials of morphine, neatly arranged, remained on a carved-out ledge. From a corner stared a dried and cracked gas mask. "I think I would rather have taken my chances outside," said the major, wiping his brow.
And what of the chances outside now-in a natural blast surpassing any made by man? Chris Newhall had said: "We think we would have some warning, but we're not exactly sure what form that warning would take. Volcanoes are different. That's why studies of Pinatubo and others are so important - they help us understand the conditions that precede really big explosions. Our only defense is knowing when they are coming and trying to get people out of the way."
Even if Iwo exploded with a force greater than that of Pinatubo - how much effect could an eruption on such an isolated island have? Possibly, say the experts, a cooling effect on the whole earth.
A RETURN TO ICELAND helped me better understand those who continue to live in the shadow of a volcanic eruption.
Almost two decades ago an eruption intruded on the south-western island of Heimaey and its picturesque fishing village of Vestmannaeyjar. A protected bay lined with docks and fish-processing factories provided a livelihood for some 5,000 inhabitants. The sea-carved cliffs of old volcanoes just offshore, grass-topped and alive with seabirds, had also spawned a burgeoning population of local artists.
This tranquillity was shattered one night in January 1973 when the ground opened unexpectedly and hell boiled into heaven. The eruption built a 700-foot-high mountain where a meadow had been, rained black ash on the town and its cliffs, and sent lava creeping toward the all-important bay.
I arrived a few days afterward and watched islanders fight to save their world. They cleaned ash off roofs, doused fires lit by hot fragments, and sprayed the advancing lava with seawater to cool and slow it. Reviews on this last effort were mixed, but the lava cut only partway into the bay.
Last year, I returned to find Vestmannaeyjar humming with normality, yellow-slickered cod fishermen swabbing down their boat decks, sheep grazing in green meadows. Ash lifted from streets and lawns had been exported for making building blocks. Students had shoveled grit from the cliffs. Even the cindery lava was tinged green by moss.
Svavar Steingrimsson, plumber and fisherman, led me up the volcano's cone. A spare, athletic man, he excels at gathering tasty guillemot eggs by swinging from a rope across the island's dizzying cliffs. Good cheer lights his suntanned face.
"I was never happy living away from the island," he told me, remembering months spent elsewhere after most of the islanders were evacuated during the eruption. "I couldn't wait to come back."
But his home sits atop the volatile Mid-Atlantic Ridge, I reminded him. And just ten years before the eruption on his island, an underwater volcano blew, creating the island of Surtsey 12 miles away. Did he ever worry about its happening again?
I was instantly sorry I had asked. His face sobered and he stared into the distance, perhaps at the bay and the cliffs above it, all shaped by volcanoes. Had I opened a crack in a venerable contentment?
Only for a moment. He turned to me with a grin. "But if I worried about it, I could not live here."
All of us, living on this volcanic planet, might say the same.


Roiling clouds of superheated ash surge from Mount Pinatubo in the Philippines (preceding pages) . Last year's eruption pumped two cubic miles of fine ash into the atmosphere during one of the century's biggest volcanic explosions. In a pyrotechnic display (following pages), molten lava explodes as it hits the ocean off Hawaii. Such outbursts laid the foundation of earth's continents and ocean basins four billion years ago. Volcanic gales formed earth's primitive atmosphere and seas.

Ghostly cast of a Pompeii citizen lies before Italy's Mount Vesuvius. Its A.D. 79 eruption buried Pompeii under 15 to 25 feet of ash and pumice, killing residents of nearby Herculaneum as well when the eruption cloud collapsed and sent hot ash down the slope. Vesuvius remains a threat.


Torrents of lava stream from a vent near the summit of Sicily's Mount Etna, whose frequent explosions have been recorded since 1500 B.C. In January 1992 the village of Zafferana lay in the path of lava from a new eruption. Dams were erected to slow the lava flow. By May the lava was only a mile short of town; it was diverted into an artificial channel, where it cooled. Recently geologists projected another hazard: collapse of the steep-sided cone as the mountain slowly slides into the Mediterranean Sea.


Hard hats are mandatory for Japanese students at the foot of Sakurajima, one of the world's most active volcanoes and neighbor to 7,500 people. Annual volcano drills prepare residents for disaster. Across the bay, the busy port of Kagoshima (left) gets regular dustings of ash.

Searing ash and gases - a pyroclastic flow - extinguished the lives of Maurice and Katia Krafft (right) when Japan's Unzen Volcano erupted in June 1991. The French volcanologists, whose fieldwork often put them in peril, had hurried to Japan to photograph the flows just after the eruption started. Incandescent avalanches still cascaded from the lava dome nine months after the Kraffts' deaths (left). Roaring down slopes with hurricane force, such pyroclastic flows destroy nearly everything in their paths. A subdivision (above) evacuated hours before the eruption began, was wiped out by flowing mud.

Brimstone-covered Vulcano, an island off the west coast of Italy (and mythical workshop of the Roman fire god, Vulcan), is now a laboratory for geologists. Probes of the volcano's fumaroles reveal increasing temperature and gas output, suggesting that an eruption could be at hand.


Sealed for safekeeping, volcanic moon rocks at a NASA laboratory in Houston, Texas, are examined by astronaut-geologist Harrison H. Schmitt (top, at left) and curator James L. Gooding. Orange soil caught Schmitt's eye during his Apollo 17 mission. Analysis showed beaded glass (above), thought to have cooled quickly from fountains of lava. Elsewhere in the solar system, Jupiter's moon Io jets sulfur and lava sheets blanket Venus, while Olympus Mons volcano on Mars is probably extinct.


Heat drives the volcano machine.
Above earth's metallic core lies a slowly churning mantle of rock kept in a plastic state by heat and pressure. The mantle is topped by the cold, rigid crust of continents and seafloors. Mantle rock continuously rises toward the crust, cools, and sinks. This motion has cracked the thin crust into about 20 rocky slabs, or plates, which slowly drift on the mantle. Plate separates at rifts, where the plastic rock of the mantle, freed of overlying pressure, liquefies and wells to the surface as magma; they collide at subduction zones, where the heavier plate is forced down into the mantle.

Volcanoes and their kin.
Most volcanic rock is extruded quietly onto the seafloor as molten basalt that oozes onto the crust, filling rifts between plates (above) and building a 45,000-mile-long undersea mountain range. Most volcanoes, however, develop near deep ocean trenches, or subduction zones, where one plate slips beneath another. Heat from friction melts the crust, releasing magma that erupts and builds rows of cones such as the Cascade Range. 
Far from the edge of a plate, massive volcanoes form over hot spots, or plumes of magma from deep inside the mantle. As a plate passes over a hot spot, volcanoes - such as the Hawaiian islands - arise one after another.
Hot spots below continents may flood the land with thick basalt. The Columbia Plateau of the Pacific Northwest was once fed by a plume that now heats geysers at Yellowstone. 

The big blow.
At midnight on June 14, the mountain began to spew deadly clouds of 1500°F gas and ash (below). Columns of ash blasted into the atmosphere, eventually reaching 25 miles high. Earthquakes came so fast and strong that they appeared on seismometers as one. At dawn on June 15 a huge blast blew out the side of the mountain. By 2 p.m., the sky was black with ash and faking chunks of pumice. More pyroclastic flows swept down the slopes, filling 650-foot canyons and spreading outward as far as 11 miles. The new ash from Pinatubo (depicted at right in a painted microscopic view) was a jumble of bits of old volcano, bubbly pumice and glassy shards from new lava, sulfur-rich anhydrite, and crystals of hornblende from deep inside the magma chamber. The 1991 eruption shut down in early September, but the loose ash will remain a deadly threat for years to come. - every time rain turns into unstable slurry.

How volcanoes become killers.
Majestic cones can turn into lethal monsters. Towering columns of ash collapse, raining hot rock on the mountain, burying whatever lies below, as at Vesuvius. Unexpected landslides, like the one at Mount St. Helens in 1980, unleash devastating lateral blasts. Lava domes cave in, releasing 1500°F pyroclastic flows, as at Unzen. Lahars, rivers of water-soaked ash, smother towns and fields, as they did at Pinatubo and Nevado del Ruiz, in Colombia. A cone can build so steeply that it can't support itself and so collapses in huge landslides that send debris miles down-slope - a process discovered in Hawaii. Flowing lava rarely kills, but it can cause widespread property loss.

Pinatubo: ready to blow. 
Quiet for 600 years, Mount Pinatubo was an innocent-looking peak in central Luzon. Then in April 1991 vigorous steam eruptions, swarms of shallow earthquakes, increased sulfur dioxide emissions, and rapid growth of lava dome heralded a powerful eruption. Scientists from the Philippine Institute of Volcanology and Seismology, later joined by a team from the US Geological Survey, monitored the events and called for evacuation of nearby villages. A series of minor explosions began on June 12.

Eve of eruption.
Pinatubo sits in the center of a 3-mile-wide caldera, a depression from an earlier eruption that had made the volcano collapse in upon itself (tilted blocks at left). A new cone formed - a dome of thick clumps of dacite rock overlain by layers of ash-flow deposits. Geothermal vents on the north side of the mountains gave the only clue that the volcano was still active. On April 2, 1991, steam and ash erupted from the site. Monitoring instruments were quickly installed.


Pinatubo's plumbing.
What caused the eruption? Scientists believe that an earthquake in July 1990 allowed buoyant basalt from the upper mantle to squeeze into the magma chamber, which was filled with viscous dacite. That injection energized the simmering reservoir and created a fluid, gas-charged magma called andesite. This magma soon rose toward the surface, building a new dome on the northeast slope that corked the system. Pressure in the magma chamber built up rapidly. Remelted dacite rose after the andesite, but ran into a clot of older domes. Probing its way to the surface, the magma finally found a clear conduit. Gas exploded from the lava, and the volcano blasted skyward, destroying the newest dome.

Ember on the Ring of Fire.
The Philippines originated as huge volcanoes built up from the ocean floor. The island of Luzon alone has 13 active volcanoes, some only a short drive from Manila, a city of 6.7 million people. The pattern of volcanoes around the rim of the Pacific Ocean is called the Ring of Fire.

A pall of ash covered Pinatubo's flattened slopes (above) in late June 1991. A look into the new caldera eight months later (below) revealed steaming fumaroles. Rain had collected into a lake. Along with ash Pinatubo ejected 20 million tons of sulfur dioxide, the main ingredient in the reflective droplets that painted dawns and sunsets a Pinatubo pink. Sulfuric acid also created an "aerosol parasol" - a shield that blocks sunlight and may lower global temperatures by one degree for several years. Pinatubo reawakened in July 1992, and lahars have continued to ravage the countryside - 40,000 more people had lost their homes by September.

Pinatubo's eruption laid waste hundreds of square miles, killed nearly 900 people, and disrupted the lives of 1.2 million more. Most damage came from lahars, floods of rain-soaked ash, after typhoons hit Luzon in July 1001. A 10-foot-high dam (above), built in a gorge in 1982 to restrain such torrents, was overtopped by the lahars, which then scoured out the channel beneath to a depth of 60 feet. Bridges, power lines, waterworks, and 110,000 homes were destroyed. Cement-like ash collapsed the roofs of thousands of structures (right) and shut down nearly Clark Air Base.
Some 650,000 Filipinos were left without income (above right). An early estimate put losses at 440 million dollars; cleanup and rebuilding may top 10 billion. Another big eruption, as was recently forecast, can only add to the strain on the badly damaged economy. 
In a huge effort, 200,000 people were relocated, many to refugee camps. Today 20,000 people remain in tent cities, where more than 500 have died of disease and exposure. Most of them are Aeta tribesmen who worshiped the volcano and hunted on its slopes. 
Losses might have been worse, but the effective monitoring network and early evacuation saved thousands of lives. One especially convincing tool to roust unwilling residents was a videotape showing rampaging lahars and pyroclastic flows - the kind of damage that their apparently quiet volcano might cause. The tape had been made by Maurice Krafft, who was killed just days before Pinatubo's eruption by a pyroclastic flow in Japan. 

Big blasts of the past. 
U.S. volcanoes have often erupted with enormous force, sending ash far afield. Mount Manama exploded around 4900 B. C., forming Crater Lake. An eruption at Yellowstone 600,000 years ago was among the largest. 
Floods of basalt inundated the Northwest about 15 million years ago. Lesser flows and eruptions are shown in light red. The U. S. Geological Survey lists 44 sites with the potential to erupt, perhaps explosively.
Measuring almost imperceptible changes in the landscape, lasers in the caldera at Long Valley, California, help gauge its potential for eruption. Earthquakes throughout the 1980s raised concerns at the nearby Mammoth Lakes resort area, background. Magma is on the move beneath the caldera, and Long Valley's violent past warrants the continued monitoring of the volcano.

The blast that astounded the nation left Mount St. Helens with a huge gash on its north face (left). The 1980 eruption advanced prediction skills and monitoring methods. Relatively quiet today, the steaming mountain still yields data on dome formation (below).

Mushrooming like a nuclear cloud, hot ash rises in an updraft over a pyroclastic flow at Redoubt Volcano in Alaska, threatening aviation. In December 1989, a 747 flying 200 miles to the north lost power when glassy ash from the volcano melted onto the jet's turbines. Though that airliner landed safely at Anchorage, dozens of similar incidents around the world highlighted the need for an improved warning system. Radar doesn't see fine ash, but satellites do: getting information quickly to the pilots is the problem.

Scalding exhalations from volcanic fumaroles created an ice cave near Iceland's Torfa Glacier. Volcanic eruptions beneath glaciers often melt the ice, causing floods, while the island's geothermal power industry capitalizes on volcanic fire turning water into steam.

Bearing food and gifts, Balinese from the village of Duda pass beneath arching bamboo poles as they celebrate an annual festival. These Hindus revere the volcano Gunung Agung as the center of the universe.

Dominating the skyline, nearly 130 volcanoes shape the backbone of Indonesia. On Java, 12,000-foot-high Semeru looms over Bromo, steaming inside Tengger caldera. Indonesians have terraced the fertile slopes of their volcanoes for millennia and have seen their fields destroyed by lahars and eruptions. During recent decades the densely populated nation has averted large numbers of casualties trough rigorous monitoring and public-safety programs.

Skylight into the underworld: An observer in Hawaii Volcanoes National Park peers into a lava tube, an enclosed channel of molten rock. Offshore, a diver braves hot water and billowing black sand as lava erupts below the surface. Such flows continually add new land in the planet's timeless process of renewal.

*
vol 200, n°4, October 2001.

Once and future fury : California's volcanic North.

Born of colossal collisions and far from dead, California's volcanoes have inspired fiery legends, New Age religions, and, from to time, sheer terror. Cinder cone in Lassen Volcanic Park is just one vivid reminder.

You're a helpless passenger on a plate of continental crust that glides across the planet's seething interior. If you live in North America, chances are you're on a plate that's inching westward. If you live in northern California, there's another hulking crust, the Gorda plate, coming at you beneath the sea.
Where they meet, like sumo wrestlers grappling, the Gorda dives and grinds beneath the continent. Stone melts and turns to magma, and the magma churns to the surface and tosses up an arc of volcanoes, shaping the Cascade Range that reaches from northern California into Canada.
The Cascades seemed to simmer underfoot when I joined Michael Clynne, a geologist with the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS), at Lassen Volcanic National Park. We had to tiptoe across a field of steaming fumaroles and stinking, burping mud pots. A boardwalk built for sightseers had just collapsed from landslides.
"This is very dynamic land," said Clynne, a sturdy man with a rowdy brown beard. "The plumbing changes all the time, and there's a danger of falling through to a pocket of hot water or gas or hot sticky mud that you can't get off soon enough to prevent burning."
Indeed, the nearby thermal area known as Bumpass Hell was named for Kendall Vanhook Bumpass, an explorer and mountain man who fell into a boiling mud pot in 1865 and had to have his leg amputated.
In the global picture the Cascades form only one span of the volcanic Ring of Fire that surrounds the Pacific Ocean, where other oceanic and continental plates collide. Swept up in this geologic creep are scraps of the Earth's crust called terranes. Terranes extend from moving plates, so they often crash into continents rather than subduct beneath them. Geologists now say that California and much of the North American west coast were pieced together from dozens of terranes that rode in on drifting plates.
Science and fantasy mingle readily where science is already fantastic. In 1931 an American writer named Wishar Cervé postulated that one piece of migrating crust was a remnant of Lemuria, a mythical continent that had been sinking into the Pacific. Rising water had forced the beings who inhabited Lemuria to flee to high ground. When the mountains of Lemuria finally collided with a westward-moving North America, they sutured themselves to the continent and became the Cascades.
Today the faithful claim that Lemurians are a superior people who still live in a gold-lined city built inside Mount Shasta, the most mesmerizing of the Cascade volcanoes, and that Lemurians used to emerge, dressed in flowing white robes, to trade gold nuggets for supplies at local stores. Pilgrims still arrive at the town of Mt. Shasta each year, hoping to encounter Lemurians. A few say they do.
"A lot of people think of Mount Shasta as a powerful spiritual vortex," said Ashalyn, who advertises her services in town as a spiritualist. "People want to connect with that energy."
Ashalyn, a blond flower child grown cheerfully middle-aged, drove me through the manzanita and sagebrush north of Mount Shasta to Pluto Cave, a series of underground tubes left by lava flows about 200,000 years ago. "Sacred places are what customers want to see," she whispered as we entered a chamber whose ceiling stretched 30 feet above us.
Carrying flashlights, we picked our way across a boulder-strewn floor and sat in the velvet darkness. Water dripped hypnotically from the ceiling. We waited. "I'm hearing the cave say, `I welcome you into my belly,"' said Ashalyn. What else is he saying?
"He says that the Earth is constantly in motion, just like our bodies. Tension is building upon its surface, like a stretched rubber band. The geologies of the Mother are shifting and looking for a place to come to rest."
Yes, yes. That describes the cooling of the planet in soothing family terms. The poor thing's just suffering a few eons of tectonic discomfort before it settles down. "Let's go a little deeper," said Ashalyn and urged me to extend energy down the "grounding cord" of my spine to the center of the Earth. I tried, although I was skeptical about finding cosmic answers down below.
Mount Shasta is one of three major volcanoes, each a different type, that dominate northern California. It's a stratovolcano built high and handsome by layers of liquid eruptions. Lassen Peak is a plug dome whose crater is blocked by lava that was once as viscous as peanut butter. The third, Medicine Lake, is a low-lying shield volcano, shaped like a Roman warrior's shield, whose black rubble forms the edge of wetlands called the Klamath Basin.
The northern California volcanic region is splendid with scientific facts. The cycles of volcanism are laid out clear as museum specimens: craters taped in snow, dark paws of lava, hills of glossy obsidian, and cinder cones that look as if poured yesterday. But most of the people who have lived here, from Native Americans to New Age spiritualists, have sought other explanations for what they struggled to understand. Nearly every feature of this landscape of unworldly beauty and primeval power has an alternative answer, a legend, or at least a good story.
The first snow had fallen the week before I arrived. Cold had bleached the ferns that clustered around trout streams, but aspen leaves billowed sunny yellow in the valleys. This is not the classic basin-and-range California; it's more a part of the Pacific Northwest.
Most of the summer folks had retreated from Chester, a lumber-mill town in a valley near Lassen Peak, southernmost of the Cascade volcanoes. A sign on the Pine Shack Frosty stand offered free ice cream to anyone ordering during a volcanic eruption.
"We're not really in danger here," said Jerry Young, the cheerfully gruff, retired sheriff sergeant of Plumas County, as I sat with him and his cronies one morning at Danny's Kopper Kettle Cafe. "But since Mount St. Helens erupted in 1980, it's always in the hack of our minds. Lassen blew on the other side in 1915, but the only effect the mountain has had on us is flooding. We get heavy snows up here."
Before the California gold rush of the mid1800s tens of thousands of Native Americans, in four tribes, lived around Lassen, subsisting on fish, game, roots, and acorn meal. In Yana oral history Mount Lassen was Waganupa, the center of the world, whose snows melted and created canyons, caves, and ridges. Some heroes and gods are said to have transformed themselves into the ancestors of men, bears, and other living things. But some local Indians believe that two of the supernatural beings still live, like Lemurians, deep inside the mountain.
Mexico still owned California when Peter Lassen, a Danish immigrant, arrived in the early 1840s. The peak bears his name, and in 1916 President Woodrow Wilson corralled nearly all the wonders of the area for Lassen Park, now more than 150 square miles. That was barely a year after the peak erupted.
On May 30, 1914, Lassen awoke with steam explosions that eventually blasted out a crater that is a thousand feet wide. When the eruption climaxed nearly a year later, rock fragments and pumice spiraled 30,000 feet high. A pyroclastic flow-an avalanche of hot ash, pumice, rock, snow, and gas-thundered down lost Creek, northwest of the summit, turning into a mudflow, flooding the valley, and destroying houses near the town of Old Station.
Michael Clynne and I drove the 30-mile-long park road just before it closed for the snow season. "There have been three major eruptions at Lassen in the past 1,100 years," said Clynne. "The winter of 1915 was an El Nino year, with 30 feet of snow on the slopes. An avalanche took out trees on both sides; you can find car-size rocks that it carried down."
Some of the features look as fresh as yesterday. Rising 700 feet from its base, a cone of cinder sits symmetrical as sand in an hourglass on the park's northeast edge. It formed when lava shattered in midair, settling in fragments. Dunes of ash, tinted yellow and red from minerals, drift from the cone, a Martian landscape colonized by a few stunted pines.
It's a much abused country. Forest fires, fortified by too much brush and tinder, often sear the land on top; fire and brimstone rise like demons from below.
NEAR THE TOP of Mount Shasta, 70 miles northwest of Lassen, a thermal field vents sulfurous fumes. Thousands of climbers scale the peak in summer months. "The stuff has a pH of approximately 2," said Michael Zanger, a mountaineer from the town of Mt. Shasta. "It would eat the chrome right off your camera."
A Shasta tale explains that the ill smell comes from the time when a group of yellow jackets volunteered to take the people's meat from a great slaughter to the ice of the mountaintop to preserve it. But the load was heavy, and the yellow jackets were lazy. They ditched the meat below the altitude of constant freezing, where it rotted and still remains.
Mount Shasta is a majestic, 14,162-foot-high double peak that floats ethereally alone above the high arid landscape. Like Mount Fuji or Kilimanjaro, it's known as one of the world's most sacred mountains. It's a forceful presence. I found myself peering up at odd times, muttering, "Yes, yes, I know you're there."
A school of art in California venerated the mountain in the late 1800s, rendering Mount Shasta in many media and moods. Joaquin Miller, utopian and perhaps first among the popular writers who were touched by the mountain, called it "lonely as God, and white as a winter moon."
For some local Indians, Mount Shasta was the wigwam of the Creator, and its smoking caldera his cook fire. None would approach its high reaches without purification ceremonies. Disrespectful behavior on the mountain, the people of the Pit River tribe believe, can be punished by the je suchin, the black imps.
Mount Shasta owes its grandeur to a series of outbursts. The last was in the late 1700s, but its violent potential always lurks. Michael Zanger, who leads ski and climbing expeditions, warned, "There are five billion cubic feet of snow on Shasta. An eruption could be an unimaginable catastrophe, with mudflows going down the Sacramento Valley and its cities."
The town of Mt. Shasta, at the base of the peak, abuts Interstate 5, which links California with the rest of the Northwest. The mountain makes its presence felt more than 50 miles south, in Redding. Black Butte, a dark dome, sidles right up to the interstate, and Route 97, near the town of Weed, swings around a lava flow that reaches like the paw of a black cat stretching.
Mount Shasta has been a magnet for spiritualists since the late 1800s, when a local teenager, Frederick Spencer Oliver, claimed that he was possessed by the spirit of Phylos the Thibetan while working on the mountain. Oliver's book, A Dweller on Two Planets, inspired a cult following. Since then the town has welcomed, often grudgingly, seekers of truth from New Age philosophers to Christian sects.
"There are stories of people who drive past here, their cars break down, and they can't leave. They have to live here," said Dawn Fazende. She's an enigmatically serene woman with soft bangs and five house cats who publishes a magazine for New Agers, people she calls the Woos.
Woos?
"Yeah. We all came here, looked at the mountain, and said, `Woo-woo!"'
If SHASTA PUSHES your heavenly buttons, Medicine Lake volcano, only a few dozen miles to the northeast, brings you down to Earth. It has no obvious peak because its outbursts have been too liquid; its lava spread out rather than piling up. Perhaps because it lacks height, it also lacks mystery, and the few people who live in the region are mostly meat-and-potatoes pragmatists who remain here despite, not because of, the landscape.
The region's geology is best seen at Lava Beds National Monument, but it's a land more suitable for trolls than people, a plateau of sagebrush badlands pocked with pit craters, caves, gunmetal gray spatter cones, and dumps of grotesquely shaped lava that volcano-savvy Hawaiians named 'a'a, perhaps for what happens when you walk barefoot on it.
"The Modoc lava beds have an uncanny look, that only an eager desire to learn their geology could overcome," wrote John Muir.
Even more bizarre and treacherous a landscape is Glass Mountain, a tumble of obsidian east of Medicine Lake's epicenter where migratory hunter-gatherers shaped ceremonial blades nearly a thousand years ago. The most striking obsidian is a licorice black rhyolite farmed when lava cools quickly into glassy, rather than crystalline, rock.
The extended Klamath Basin was once a glacial lake sprawling over more than a thousand square miles. Now much of it has been drained in order to plant onions, potatoes, and other vegetables. A community of Mexicans who came as seasonal pickers lives year-round in the weathered Oregon-border town of Tulelakc, the "horseradish capital of the world." The region harbors six national wildlife refuges swarming with coots, geese, and ducks and offers hunting for migratory waterfowl. A sign at my motel asks: "Please do not pick and clean birds in room."
"This is thunderhead and lightning country, big skies," said Julie Donnelly-Nolan, a USGS geologist. "There's nothing much you can do with the land. You can run a few cows on it, but it isn't usable farmland - just rock."
Donnelly-Nolan has determined that Medicine Lake began erupting about 500,000 years ago, "mostly as a field of domes. And then, about 300,000 years ago, the shield volcano began to form over the top."
As lava oozed down shallow depressions and valleys, the outer shells of flows cooled more quickly than their insides, leaving hollow, wormlike lava tubes. More than 400 tube caves snake through the 73-square-mile monument alone. Some of their ceilings are 40 feet high and encrusted with delicate silicate formations and ice stalactites. For Indians as well as New Agers the tubes are the entranceways to the spirit life inside the mountains.
With an aptly named ranger, Jeff LaRock, I visited Fern Cave, which is still sacred to the Modoc, an Indian tribe that had lived on the Lost River by nearby 'rule lake. An emerald tuft of ferns, found nowhere else within 125 miles, survives in a microclimate just below the cave's entry shaft. LaRock, a rather dry and fastidious young man, surprised me by turning around three times before entering the cave, out of respect for the Modoc's beliefs.
"Modoc still use Fern Cave for rituals," he said. "They come here for reunions every summer, and some stay for days, drumming and meditating." Inside, the cave is decorated with early Indian art and steeped in at least a thousand years of human history.
In the mid 19th c century pressure from settlers drove the Modoc from their home, and the government obtusely transferred them to Oregon to share a reservation with  the Klamath, their historic enemies. 1 872 a band of fed-up Modoc led by Kintpuash, also known as Captain lack, drifted back and demanded their own reservation at Lost River. Raids and killings poisoned chances for a peaceful resolution, and full-scale war soon flared.
Captain lack and his followers holed up near Tule Lake in a natural fortress of pit craters and convoluted lava caves known today as Captain Jacks Stronghold. For four months about 170 Indians, men and women, held out against a force that eventually numbered 600. In the end the Army hanged Captain Jack and three of his men. The remaining Modoc were exiled to Oklahoma.
California's north can be desolate. A prisoner of war camp for World War II German and Italian officers still sits beside a volcanic bluff near Tule Lake; only miles away is a former internment center for Japanese Americans. At a former logging town called Tionesta an enclave of 30 individualists soured on the government live between large timber company lands and federal holdings.
"Everybody's still living in the 1800s here," said Jim Addison, owner of Tionesta's Timber Mountain general store. "They all live the old style. They all believe in honor." Here people still talk about the great storm of 1992, when the snows were so heavy in the mountains that deer were forced to find refuge on highways and railroad tracks, the only open spaces. Trains and trucks just plowed through them, and according to local legend the stench of rotten flesh spoiled the springtime.
But in the humbling magnitude of geologic time, wars, suffering, and life itself have been mere flickers. Now geologists say that the Gorda plate has nearly disappeared. As it subducts beneath North America, it pulls up the arc of volcanism like a zipper.
As this ponderous movement winds down, it transfers its energy from the Gorda to the sliver of crustal California west of the San Andreas Fault, a terrane that's drifting north toward Alaska with its own Lemurians aboard. But the languorous waltz of' the continents, the power of internal Earth, and the undeniable grace of the Creator will leave a rare beauty in far northern California. More than once while wandering around Mount Shasta or the parapets of Lassen, I would come upon a scene of startling clarity and color that I had seen before only in wistful dreams. 1 could understand how, as the Woos say, some people cannot bring themselves to leave.

FEEL THE BURN. Narrowly avoiding a steam blast known to reach 165 miles an hour, geochemist Cathy Janik prepares to sample the hottest fumarole in Devils Kitchen, a geothermal area five miles southeast of Lassen Peak. On this day the vent hit a record 254°F.

SECRETS IN STONE. Cinder Cone's Fantastic Lava Beds looked so new to early researchers they misdated them by 200 years. Yet the beds pale in geologic significance to the eruption 300,000 years ago that toppled an ancestral Mount Shasta and strewed its remnants 30 miles into the Shasta Valley (above right).

1. AVALANCHE HUMMOCKS. Shasta has been quiet for 200 years, but its potential firepower is evident in Shasta Valley's hummocky terrain, shaped by an avalanche from an earlier eruption that nearly leveled the volcano.

2. CINDER CONES.  Made of tephra - lava blown into the air and solidified - cinder cones are usually small, steep-sided structures formed during a single, mildly explosive event. Heavier lava normally flows from the base.

3. LAVA TUBES. Like a river moving beneath a layer of ice, 2200°F lava continues to flow as its surface cools, hardens, and insulates the flow beneath. When the hot lava pours out, a long lava tube often remains.

A turbulent past.
Three tectonic plates collide off Cape Mendocino, stoking Northern California's volcanic fires, particularly the grinding of the Gorda plate under North America. Lassen Peak (opposite top) was the latest to erupt, in 1915. Like Mount St. Helens, its larger sister farther north, Lassen's biggest blast flattened forests for miles. Slowly recovering, the devastated area is just one legacy of a restless land. 

UNFORGETTABLE. "White and flashing like a pyramid of silver" is how poet Joaquin Miller saw Mount Shasta. Built by eruption after eruption, the peak inspires such awe it has become a mecca for New Age pilgrims. New beliefs meld with old at a celebration of the Maya New Year (above right).

Ranger Kelly Fuhrmann stands beneath the skylight of one of some 400 lava-tube caves in Lava Beds National Monument.
Formed when outer layers of a flow cool rapidly and solidify as the remaining lava drains out, such caves litter the area that was the last redoubt for Modoc Indians. Their war with the US government ended in 1873.

SHARP AS GLASS. Contoured by snow, Little Glass Mountain oozed from Medicine Lake volcano 1,100 years ago like a 200-foot-high wall of taffy. Nearby Glass Mountain, rich in silica, cooled rapidly and formed obsidian (right), used to make scalpels that can be a hundred times sharper than steel.

BUILDING BLOCKS. Trudging through loose ash, hikers climb the 700-foot-high flank of Cinder Cone. Big Cascade peaks may get the glory, but countless smaller volcanoes built the backbone of the range.

*
February 2002.
Mount Etna Ignites.
By Marco Pinna
Photographs by Carsten Peter.
Europe's tallest active volcano erupts in grandeur, enthralling Sicilians and intriguing scientists.

For 24 days last summer Mount Etna gave its most dazzling show in decades. Closely watched by scientists, rivers of lava and fountains of fire renewed the awe of those who live in the shadow of Sicily's famed volcano.

"You have to stand still, watch where the lava bombs are falling, and get out of the way." - Photograph Carsten Peter.

The explosive birth of a cone 6,900 feet up Etna's southeast flank hurls ash and hot rock. Sound waves rattled windows 20 miles away.

Surrounded by fire, we are cold. Altitude and sulfurous vapors make it hard to breathe. Yet standing 9,500 feet (2,900 meters) up the side of Mount Etna, we are willing captives of an apocalyptic landscape. A thousand feet (300 meters) below us, at the center of a valley of black lava called the Piano del Lago, an enormous cone that didn't exist a week ago erupts incessantly, hurling lava bombs as big as cars hundreds of feet into the air. We hear the roar of the explosions and the thud of the incandescent rocks as they hit the ground and roll down the sides of the cone. Beside it, lava spews from another cone, smaller but just as active. The golden river of lava to our left is pouring from a Þssure in a summit crater belching smoke and ash above us. I move closer to the lava until the heat is unbearable. It makes strident clicking sounds, like glass rubbing glass. But if you listen more closely, you hear a dark murmuring below.
"It's incredible," photographer Carsten Peter says to me. " This cone has grown 300 feet (90 meters) in a few days." Carsten has been on Etna since seismic tremors heralded the July 17 eruption. Lava was already flowing from the summit when his colleague Chris Heinlein straddled a new fissure on the flank (above). Four days later the fissure blew nearly a mile high (right).

Etna's realm
Europe's highest active volcano-nearly 11,000 feet tall - Etna dominates northeastern Sicily and has loomed in cultures that colonized the Mediterranean's largest island. Plato sailed from Greece in 387 B.C. just to have a look at it. Legend says that here Odysseus dodged boulders flung by a Cyclops. Romans considered it Vulcan's forge. Ninth-century Arabs transformed its snow into sweet, flavored ices. Always smoking, Etna has been increasingly active in the past 50 years. Because its outbursts occur at upper elevations and its lava moves slowly, Etna rarely takes human lives. The intensity of this eruption produced a plume of ash that arced toward Libya (above, July 24), eventually reaching into the Sahara. A Landsat image on July 21 (left, with low clouds) captures the plume and new lava fissures.

With strong winds blowing heat and gases away from him, photographer Carsten Peter worked - in respirator and helmet - a mere 20 feet from this turbulent magma.

"You must imagine, lava is quite heavy; after all, it's liquid stone flying around." - Carsten Peter.

Volcanic Intrigue.
"I have never seen so many things happening at the same time on this volcano." said Carsten Peter, a veteran Etna watcher. For scientists too last summer's eruption was a chance to study surprising Etna behavior. In late June the south east summit crater displayed routine degassing (above); a slender tornado forms in the convergence of the heat and the altitude's chill. Then paroxysmal blasts rocked the crater, and a fissure cracked its side, spilling lava. Lava began pouring from five other new fissures farther down the flank. Two cones rose on the flank with breathtaking speed, one spouting lava fountains as tall as 1,300 feet (left). Simultaneous summit and flank action is unusual for Etna, and the eruptions were unusually explosive. Also, analysis of the flank lava revealed a mineral called amphibole, present in Etna's ancient lava flows but not seen in large amounts in the past 15,000 years. Is a new source of lava feeding the flank? One thing is clear to researchers: Something down there is changing.
Etna's most destructive eruption in history raged for four months in 1669, when relentless lava hit some dozen villages, breached the City walls of Catania, and pushed into the sea. For small towns on the lower slopes, soil enriched by volcanic ash is a trade-off for life in precarious terrain.

A windstorm of ash and letha gas swirls from a fissure on Piano Del Lago. Over the next 6 days, a 300-foot cone would rise here, later collapsing 65 feet.

"Etna can be considered a monster. But deep down, it's a good monster." - Mount Etna Ranger Galtano Mangano.

Full helmet and thermal suit - and years of learned caution - let French technician Charles Rivière gather lava samples close to the action.

"It's a fantastatic force of nature, with a terrific moise and very real danger of getting hit." - Research technician Charles Rivière.

Living with Etna. Cooling to black, a wall of jagged lava a thousand feet wide and as much as 130 feet tall dwarfs a bulldozer building a diversion embankment. The dusty, dangerous work (left) by a crew of 400 men succeeded in keeping lava away from Rifugio Sapienza, a ski-lift base and scientific monitoring station. Lava stopped less than three miles from Nicolosi, the must threatened of the mountain's small towns. Though some roads and property were destroyed and ashfall closed the airport several days in Catania, Sicily's second largest city, Etna kept its reputation as a "friendly giant." But could anomalies in the 2001 eruption signal a change in its nature?

The lights of Catania and the Ionian sea coast spread below the new Piano del Lago cone. The ancient name Etna may mean "burning" and the moutain again showed why.

"We do not have a love-hate relationship with Etna, as one might think. We have a love relationship." - Salvatore Moschetto, Mayor of Nicolosi.


Field Notes From Author
Marco Pinna

Best
My hotel was on Mount Etna, as close to the eruption as you can get. Every night the volcano put on a real fireworks display. I often couldn't sleep because of the loud eruptions, so I would go out on my balcony and look at the show. Other times I got up, sometimes at two in the morning, and drove out to see what was going on. I would stay there alone, looking at the fire fountains up close. When police roadblocks stopped me from passing, I left my car on the road, bypassed the barriers, and walked over old lava fields.

Quirkiest
One night after a long Sicilian dinner, the owner of my hotel invited me to join him and his party for drinks. His guests had come from Catania to see the volcanic eruptions. Everybody was slightly drunk. Around one a.m. someone suggested that we go see the lava flow up close, so we loaded into two cars and drove over steep dirt roads through the middle of the forest. When we got to the main lava flow, we discovered that it formed a wall about 70 feet (20 meters) high. The lava had cooled off on the sides, so we started to climb the hill of rocks. But they were still too hot to touch.
Our group was completely unorganized. Some were wearing sandals, and I was the only one with a flashlight. We were stumbling up the lava flow and trying to pick up lava rocks as souvenirs. But they were so hot that we couldn't keep them in our pockets. The active flow was at least 300 feet (100 meters) further, but the going was getting rough on the hot rocks, and the guys in sandals started falling. So we gave up and turned back.

Did you know?

Despite its look during eruptions, Mount Etna is not a killer volcano. Etna keeps its explosive eruptions rare and close to its top, and its lava moves very slowly down its flanks, giving people a chance to escape. In its entire recorded history, which goes back to 1500 B.C., only 73 confirmed deaths can be directly attributed to eruptions, according to Etna expert Boris Behncke of the University of Catania. Popular accounts sometimes attribute as many as 20,000 deaths to the destructive 1669 eruption. But, according to Behncke, no deaths are actually documented from that eruption, though property damage from lava flows was enormous. He believes that those staggering casualties occurred 24 years later, when an earthquake killed perhaps 54,000 people in eastern Sicily, including much of the population of Catania. The two deaths that occurred during the eruption of July and August 2001 were attributed to lightning-not to eruptive activity. Etna, it seems, stands up to its nickname of the "friendly giant." 

-Mary Jennings

Fiery Flow.
Exploding from a new fissure on the flank of Italy's Mount Etna, lava forms an incandescent river beneath a scorching cloud of ash during an eruption that began on July 17, 2001, and subsided 24 days later."The detonations were so loud they were heard all over eastern Sicily and made windows and doors vibrate in the town of Catania, 30 kilometers [nearly 20 miles] away," says Boris Behncke, a volcanologist based on the island. Accounts of Etna's eruptions stretch back to 1500 B.C., one of the world's longest recorded histories of volcanic activity.

Primordial Fires.
A fountain of molten rock builds a new cone, which rose 300 feet (90 meters) in just six days. During this most recent eruption, six fissures split the volcano, discharging more than 27 million cubic yards (21 million cubic meters) of lava. Scientists were intrigued to find two different types of lava, indicating separate sources deep in the Earth. "One type, from the vents at 2,100 and 2,570 meters [6,890 and 8,430 feet] in elevation, was unlike anything Etna has emitted for the past 15,000 years," says volcanologist Boris Behncke.


Explosive Power.
In a fiery blast, one section of the vent at 6,890 feet (2,100 meters) launches bombs of lava through the air. Ash and steam bursting from another section tear blocks of solid rock from the sides of the vent and send them flying as well. Gases, dissolved in lava under pressure inside the Earth, cause this violent activity when they reach the surface and expand rapidly. First erupting on July 18, this vent was the last to shut down on August 9.


Too close for comfort.
Reacting instinctively, engineer Chris Heinlein raises a hand to shield his face from the searing heat of lava spattering from the vent at 8,860 feet (2,700 meters). "The Earth was working and living, and we were right above the epicenter, shaking constantly," remembers photographer Carsten Peter. Heinlein and Peter often work together to document volcanic eruptions. "I always ask him, 'Please warn me if a lava bomb is heading for me,'" Peter explains. "It's very important to cooperate like that. There's no way to escape an explosion when you're that close. You just have to try to avoid the fallout."


Uncertain footing.
Standing on recently erupted rock still hot and creeping downhill, Chris Heinlein photographs another, fresher part of the flow moving toward the town of Nicolosi from the vent at 6,890 feet (2,100 meters). Ultimately the lava stopped less than three miles (five kilometers) from the town. Flows from other vents threatened Rifugio Sapienza, a ski-lift base, and destroyed several parts of the ski lift as well as the upper station of the cable car.

A Rocky future.
Dressed for protection against the smaller pieces of flying debris (larger ones can reach the size of a car), technician Charles Rivière films the vent at 8,430 feet (2,600 meters). Researchers at the Pierre Süe Laboratory in Saclay, France, will analyze the footage along with lava samples Rivière collected to better understand changes in the volcano's chemical composition. Volcanologists believe this latest round of activity at Mount Etna may be the first in a series of similar eruptions that could keep nearby residents on edge for the next few years. 

*
May 1997.
Iceland's trial by fire.
Superheated by scalding magma, water flashes to steam at the bottom of a 600-foot-deep chasm in Iceland's Vatnajökull glacier. Like a hellish scene from a medieval imagination, this hissing cauldron yawned open last fall when one of the largest volcanic eruptions to hit Iceland this century rumbled to life beneath the country's biggest ice cap. For two weeks ash and steam billowed skyward as elemental forces clashed in thermal battle (far right). Yet this violent spectacle was but a prelude to the watery cataclysm that would follow.

Glacial gash.
Cut and bleeding, Vatnajokull's frozen hide was lacerated as ash-laden runoff rushed from the eruption site, carving an ice canyon 500 feet deep and more than two miles long. Magma welling up through a fissure in the bedrock melted the deeper levels of the glacier, causing the surface to collapse and shatter like plate glass.
Torrents of meltwater sluiced through the chasm then tunneled below the glacier to create a river roofed by ice (foldout). This drained into a geothermally warmed lake hidden in an ice-capped crater known as Grimsvotn caldera.
During the first days of October, when the eruption peaked, billions of gallons of meltwater filled the lake to bursting, prompting officials to warn that an explosive glacial flood, or jökulhlaup, was imminent. But as journalists and scientists from around the globe gathered to witness the predicted deluge, Vatnajokull made a dramatic pause. Anticipation waned as days turned into weeks. Then, shortly after dawn on November 5, the pent-up waters spewed forth with startling speed in Iceland's most powerful flood in almost 60 years.


Subarctic hot spot.
Iceland sits athwart the volatile Mid-Atlantic Ridge, a seafloor mountain range where two of the colossal slabs of rock that make up earth's crust-the North American plate and the Eurasian plate-part company. The island is also above a hot spot, a kind of subterranean stovepipe deeply rooted in earth's mantle. As the plates pull apart, magma rises between them along an active volcanic zone that encompasses about a third of Iceland, including the western half of Vatnajokull.

Located between two major volcanoes- Grimsvotn and Bardarbunga - the fissure that erupted last autumn, following a telltale series of earthquakes (red dots), tore open the rocky rind that separates Vatnajokull's frozen underbelly from Iceland's fiery underworld. Intense melting fueled by the eruption produced vast volumes of water, which amassed in Grimsvotn's ice-capped lake.
Under normal conditions geothermal heat rising beneath the glacier melts enough ice to fill the lake and trigger a small flood every few years. But an eruption fast-forwards the process.
"The lake ordinarily rises 60 feet a year," says Magnus Tumi Gudmundsson, a geophysicist at the University of Iceland. "But during the first days of the eruption it was rising 60 feet a day."
The ascending water, in turn, lifted the 800-foot-thick lid of ice covering the caldera. When at last the swelling lake floated the overlying ice off its footing, nearly a cubic mile of water burst from Grimsvotn and surged beneath the ice some 30 miles to the glacier's edge. Such was the power of the jokulhlaup that blocks of ice 30 feet high and judged to weigh a thousand tons were torn from the glacier and deposited three miles away.


Space-age look at an ice-age event.
Eyeing the eruption from above (facing page), scientists gained new insights into the ancient upheavals that forged Iceland's dramatic landscape. "Subglacial venting probably shaped the land in this region more than anything else," says Gudmundsson. Yet this was the first time we've been able to observe such an eruption from beginning to end."
To study each phase, he spent many hours in an airplane, wheeling like a hawk above the ice. Earth-orbiting satellites, meanwhile, provided even loftier views.
On a satellite radar image made during day seven of the eruption (right), the volcanic fissure resembles a jagged knife wound. Images taken two weeks later by a pair of satellites, one orbiting a day behind the other, were melded by computer to show changes in the glacier's surface over the 24 hour period (below right). Mottled colors indicate the ice sheet subsiding around the eruption site, while tight swirls at the bottom of the image record the ominous rise of the ice atop Grimsvotn lake.
To aid in forecasting when the jokulhlaup would hit, hydrologist Arni Snorrason (below) took daily water samples at the foot of the glacier, where a sharp increase in waterborne sediments would signal the onset of the flood. A rainbow that arced above the bridge where he was stationed proved portentous: When the long-anticipated jokulhlaup finally came, it swept the bridge away like a divine judgment.


Of ice and men.
Recalibrating his sense of scale, Arni Snorrason sizes up mammoth blocks of ice blown from the glacier as floodwaters broke through the surface. Icelandic history records about 60 such cataclysms since Vikings arrived in the ninth century, but scientists were skeptical of the near apocalyptic descriptions of monstrous floods. "Now we realize the stories are probably quite true," Snorrason says. The gods of volcanism beneath Vatnajokull have been relatively quiet for the past 60 years. But that respite is likely finished. Even if they sink back into slumber, the thermal effects of last year's outburst will endure for as long as 20 years, triggering more floods in coming decades.
"This event is not over," says Gudmundsson. "Even now ice continues to melt, and Grfmsvotn lake is again rising." Just when the gathering jokulhlaup will burst forth, and with what degree of ferocity, is impossible to know. This much is certain: Such hazards will remain part of the challenge and wonder of life on this island of fire and ice.

Text by Glenn OELAND. EDITORIAL STAFF


*
vol 200, n° 2, August 2001.
Russia's frozen inferno.

Armed with guts and a gas mask, explorer Franck Tessier faces toxic steam from Kamchatka's volcanoes.

Unable to resist the lure of big, bad eruptions, writer Jeremy Schmidt and photographer Carsten Peter journey to the Russian Far East for a closer look at the volatile Kamchatka Peninsula - one of the most volcanically active regions on Earth.

A hardy team reveals the explosive peaks and steam-pocked glaciers of Kamchatka, land of more than a hundred volcanoes.

When the German naturalist Georg Steller came to Russia's Kamchatka Peninsula in 1740, he got a crash course in geology from the native Itelmen people. Having lived for untold generations in this land of smoke and ferment, the Itelmen knew exactly how volcanoes work.
Eruptions were caused by gomuls, they told Steller - ghosts of the earth who lurked in volcanoes'cavernous craters. When hungry, they would leave their volcano and hunt the ocean for whales, grasping them with enormous, spear-shaped fingers and hauling them home to eat. Over huge bonfires the gomuls roasted mountains of whale flesh, sending clouds of smoke and vapor billowing up to the heavens. Rivers of boiling whale fat streamed clown the slopes. The Earth shook, and whale bones flow through the air. Only when the gomuls were satisfied did the volcano fall back into steamy silence.
Steller, who later left Kamchatka to join Vitus Bering's second expedition to the North Pacific, asked how the ltelmen knew all this. They had found whale bones on the mountain slopes, they said. A few brave souls had even stolen to the rim of the crater, peered in, and seen the monsters' lair.
More than 260 years later the Kamchatka Peninsula is still a hot and shaky place, a 750-mile-long scimitar of land frequently jolted by eruptions - big, explosive eruptions - in a string of volcanocs that is one of the most volatile on Earth. Of Kamchatka's hundred-plus volcanoes, 29 are active. The largest, Klyuchevskoy, pours out an average of 60 million tons of basalt a year.
Late last summer I spent a month in Kamchatka stalking volcanic eruptions with a team that included French explorers Franck Tessier and Irène Margaritis, German photographer Carsten Peter, and a Russian guide named Feodor Farberov. Carsten - 41, blond, and buzzing with energy - has spent his life documenting volcanoes with a camera. The closer he gets, the better he likes it.
Not so Feodor, a stolid, muscular, bearded mountaineer of 39. The son of two volcanologists, he was born in a village at the foot of Klyuchevskoy and grew up with the dangers and discomforts of volcano research. In the field "volcanic ash covered everything," he recalled. "Our water, our air, even our food tasted and smelled of sulfur." Having seen "enough eruptions for a lifetime," Feodor likes his mountains cold, quiet, and covered with snow for skiing.
Bezymianny, one of the dozen volcanoes that make up the peninsula's Klyuchevskoy group, was thought to be dormant until 1955, when it suddenly began to shake and swell and spew. On March 30, 1956, it exploded, enveloping the vicinity in a shroud of ash. Within two days the ash cloud reached Alaska, and two days later it was detected over the British Isles. The explosion flattened trees 15 miles away. Like Mount St. Helens, it started with a giant avalanche, then blew out sideways, leaving a yawning horseshoe-shaped crater.
Since 1956 Bezymianny has continued to erupt periodically, and when we started out to explore its blast zone, I found myself leaning toward Carsten's view of things. Echoing in my ears was the dinner toast we'd heard in the home of a Kamchatka scientist: "Please God, send to us the dreadful eruptions!"
We hiked through soft ash, sinking knee-deep at times, climbed heaps of shattered rock, and scrambled in and out of ragged gorges. Through wind and whipping clouds we climbed to the crater's broken rim and looked over. The inner cliffs dropped hundreds of feet to a circular channel ringing a new mountain rising from the ruins of the old-a huge dome of smoking rock, its summit towering above us.
On the fluor of the channel sprawled a field of ice and snow blackened by cinders and split by crevasses that gaped white in the enveloping mists. As we clung to the sharp edge, the dome hurled showers of rock from its steep sides. When large boulders hit the ice below, they left white wounds in the dark surface.

0ne of Kamchatka's full-time volcanologists is Fugene Vakin. Much of his work has been on Mutnovsky, a complex structure with multiple active craters on a single massif. In March 2000, steam blasts rocked one of the craters while within it a glacier began to collapse. A large section of the glacier vanished, and a green acidic lake, 650 feet in diameter, appeared amid the broken ice. This kind of activity, Vakin told us, indicates that Mutnovsky is heating up and signals the possibility of even bigger eruptions.
We set out just after dawn to follow a turbid river up into that crater. Our path led across slopes of wet, slippery ash, part fumaroles belching steam. Scrambling across the glacier, its surface a mass of dirty ice and cinders, we skirted the lake and climbed to a narrow divide. Standing on ice, we felt the hot breath of fumaroles; around us rose the steep crater walls lined with red and yellow deposits of crystalline sulfur. Slabs of glacier peeled off and crashed into the sour pea green water.
Carsten was ecstatic. When he and Franck decided to crawl under the glacier into a dark ice cave carved by a river of warm, acid water, l followed. Feodor just shook his head.
We crab-walked under huge blocks of ice that had fallen around the entrance, then waded through shallow water to the edge of darkness. Pale light shafted dawn from crevasses in the roof, barely illuminating a world of gray: gray shadows, gray ice, gray volcanic ash, gray river. The inner walls, scalloped by steam and flowing water, were hung with icicles.
The ice groaned above and around us-the internal workings of the glacier as it melted and moved. The hairs on iny neck rose, and with them dreadful imaginings. Not only could the tunnel implode at any moment but also the lake, held back by only a wall of ice, could drain in a flash. lt looked as if part of the cave had collapsed a few weeks earlier - what if another eruption, or even a slight earthquake, occurred while we were clown there? As Carsten cheerfully put it, "The lake is above you, of course. You should feel as in a mousetrap."
As Carsten and Franck's flashlights winked out of sight ahead, 1 did what any prudent mouse would do. 1 made nny way back to open ground and rat with Feodor on a dusty block of ice. Rolling sulfurous vapor filtered the sun with the hint of violence, a reminder that this peaceful afternoon was just a brief respite trom the ongoing storm of rocks and tire. Feodor and 1 chatted about our lives and our familier as the sun sank toward the crater rim. 1 was content just to be there, sitting on the sidelines as the gomuls did their work.

LIKE A VAT OF ACID, the milky blue water in Maly Semiachik's crater lake may be corrosive enough to dissolve the seams of a rubber boat. So Tessier and team member Irène Margaritis wrapped theirs in acid-resistant PVC plastic and paddled carefully to avoid splashing. Taking to the air in a motorized paraglider, Carsten Peter cruised over a broad outwash plain (bottom right) between volcanoes near Klyuchevskoy. Buffeted by erratic winds, Peter crash-landed repeatedly but was unfazed. Setting out after a rain to explore the seracs and crevasses of Mutnovsky glacier, Tessier (below) found himself mired in a slippery gumbo of ash on the slopes of the volcano.

Scaling summits of ice in the badlands of Mutnovsky glacier, Tessier, at far right, uses crampons and ice axes to top a huge block and scout the way ahead. As thermal activity heats the ground below, this ice field melts and breaks apart into a constantly shifting obstacle course of unstable seracs and crevasses.

Cooking in Uzon Caldera, a hot pool bubbles (opposite) as volcanic gas rises through ooze the consistency of chocolate pudding. Nearby, irregularities in a shallow streambed produc tiny wave patterns on the water's surface. Thermophilic, or heat-loving, algae produce the stream's brilliant color.

WINGS OVER Kamchatka gave Carsten Peter a new perspective on Uzon caldera (below), a 40-square-mile depression left behind by a cataclysmic eruption 40,000 years ago. Besides marshy tundra, Uzon's hot springs and fumaroles form the centerpiece of Kronotsky State Biosphere Reserve, which includes the Valley of Geysers, the second largest geyser field in the world, after Yellowstone in the United States. In an Uzon hot spring, colonies of filamentous bacteria (bottom right) resemble a miniature version of snow-covered Mutnovsky (right), a complex massif with several active craters, one of which exploded in March 2000, melting part of a glacier and forming a crater lake.


Patched with duct tape, this chopper made flying almost as scary as rappelling into a Gorely volcano crater, as Margaritis and Tessier are about to do. "We asked the pilot of there was a problem," says author Jeremy Schmidt. "'No,' he said, 'in Afghanistan the blades were full ot bullet holes, and we could still fly."


Légendes :
Tessier probes fumaroles on the toxic, sulfur-encrusted firescape of one of Mutnovsky volcano's active craters. Scorching gases lie ahead.

Gas buffles rise from a thermal pond in Uzon caldera, where volcanism is dormant for now. On the far shore a ranger armed with a rifle keeps watch for bears.

Highest active volcano in Asia, Klyuchevskoy (below, at right) looms behind Kamen, center, and Bezymianny. Once thought dormant, Bezymianny exploded in 1956 and still smolders today.

Between a rock and a hot place.
Perched on a tee of shaded ice, a boulder temporarily rests on Mutnovsky volcano's melting, debris-encrusted glacier. Explorer Franck Tessier scaled the red rock for a better view of one of the mountain's craters as it steamed toxic fumes into the sky (background). With author Jeremy Schmidt and photographer Carsten Peter, Tessier spent a month probing both the fire and ice of Russia's geothermal hot spot, Kamchatka Peninsula.
In Hot Water.
Pristine surface of Karymsky Lake masks a violent past: A 1996 underwater eruption spewed an ash column nearly five miles (8 kilometers) high and forged a small inner crater (foreground). Ash choked the air. Wildlife perished when muddy waves plastered the shoreline and acid poisoned the water. As the lake's acidity dilutes, plants and animals gradually return-surviving the violent moods of this turbulent land.

Fighting the Fumes.
To photograph Tessier in one of Mutnovsky's steaming craters, Peter grappled not only with stinging eyes and his own cumbersome gas mask but also with his gear. Sulfuric gases quickly corrode a camera's inner workings; changing film required both a protected place and a deft hand. Winds cleared the steam for just milliseconds, allowing Peter only an instant to capture the crater wall's brilliant sulfur deposits: "I was improvising all the time because the conditions were so difficult.""

Popping the Big Top.
Recurrent blasts sometimes tear the lid off Avachinsky (foreground), distinguishing it from the quieter Koryaksky. Both watch over the peninsula's largest city, Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky, a fishing center whose 200,000 residents live in buildings made of a concrete rich in volcanic cinders. With some of the world's most powerful and frequent eruptions scarring this 750-mile-long (1,200-kilometer-long) swath each year, Kamchatka's 29 active volcanoes perform the greatest show on the Pacific Ring of Fire.

Field Notes From Author Jeremy Schmidt
Best.
The southern part of Kamchatka is a national park centered around a huge lake with rivers and streams pouring in. Just at dusk we got into a big Russian MI-8 and flew from there toward a nearby volcano. We flew low-maybe 450 feet (140 meters)-came over a divide, and followed a shallow river running through rich green tundra. Then we began seeing groups of grizzly bears fishing for salmon. We lost track, but I'm sure we saw 60 or 70 bears during that 20-minute flight. The flowers were in bloom, the berries were ripe, and salmon crowded the rivers. The bears gorged themselves on blueberries and fish. Everything seemed enriched. And we were like kids on our first airplane flight. We were all yelling about the bears.

Worst.
We went to Plotina, a broad outwash plain at the base of Bezymianny and Klyuchevskoy volcanoes, to explore the dozen or so volcanoes in the immediate area. After we put up our tents, the Russians began erecting a kitchen tent. They pulled it over a sturdy wooden frame, tied it down with climbing rope, and then weighted it down with rocks. They said the wind could get pretty strong, but the rest of us had mountain tents, and I frankly thought our comrades were overdoing it. Then a storm blew in.
The wind was so rough that it almost carried the kitchen tent away. To walk there from my tent was a bit of a job. Nonstop rain came down in sheets for three days. And it snowed. The temperature dropped to right around freezing or a little above. We were completely pinned down. I spent those three days semireclined in my tent reading a thriller.

Quirkiest.
Carsten brought two motorized paragliders, expecting that he would be able to use them to photograph parts of volcanoes he couldn't easily get to by walking.

Field Notes From Photographer Carsten Peter.
Best.
This place was like being on another planet. The atmosphere billowed with vapor, and we came across acidic lakes. Mist from a waterfall burned my eyes. I was fascinated by the formations in what may be the largest ice cave in Kamchatka. The contrast of a frozen gallery on the shore of a hot, acidic river was otherworldly.

Worst.
This coverage was about volcanoes, so of course I wanted photographs of volcanic activity. There was plenty of activity just before the expedition started last year. But when I got to Kamchatka I didn't find any, despite earthquakes indicating that violent eruptions could happen any time. I was so frustrated! How could I cover volcanoes without any eruptions? The one advantage was that without activity we were able to get closer to the craters and see how recent activity changed the interior. The close proximity took the coverage in another direction and gave us a different experience.

*
The chain of events that leads to volcanic eruptions like the one on Soufriere Hills in Montserrat [captured on video May 12, 1996] begins as red-hot magma blazes to the Earth's surface in one of three ways. 
Hot Spots.
Magma from deep in the mantle burns a hole in the overlying tectonic plate, one of the great jigsaw pieces of the Earth's crust that move constantly in very slow motion. As the plate moves, bursts of magma sporadically burn one hole after another. 
This creates a volcanic chain such as the Hawaiian islands, which include ancient Niihau sitting stone cold at one end and the new Loihi Seamount percolating underwater just off the Big Island at the other. Magma that has reached the Earth's surface is known as lava. It initially flows from a crack in the crust and then hardens. The next surge of lava oozes out on top of that first layer, and succeeding surges slowly build up over many thousands of years to form new crust. 
Spreading Centers.
Where tectonic plates pull apart, magma rises to fill the gap. As the magma hardens, it becomes part of the diverging plates. As the plates shift apart, new magma rises to fill the gap. This process mostly takes place beneath the oceans in what are called spreading centers. 
Almost continuous, the centers create a 46,600-mile- (74,995-kilometer-) long Mid-Ocean Ridge that snakes around the globe like the seam of a baseball. A section of this ridge in the North Atlantic, combined with a hot spot, has produced the volcanic island of Iceland. 
Subduction Zones.
The old, hard edge of an oceanic plate shoves beneath the more buoyant continents at many plate boundaries in what are called subduction zones.This consumption of crust is the counterpart of spreading centers, which create crust in an endless cycle that lays down a new ocean floor about every 200 million years. 
As the wet oceanic plate sinks into the mantle, increasing temperature and pressure cause the plate to dry out, driving off fluids rich in water and dissolved minerals. These fluids rise into the overlying mantle, causing it to melt to form magma, which erupts in an arc of volcanoes all along the line of subduction. The famous Ring of Fire in the Pacific-including Mount St. Helens-is the result of plates subducting beneath Asia, Australia, and South, Central, and North America. 
A Full Plate.
Soufriere Hills on Montserrat probably first erupted about 100,000 years ago. The oceanic plate it sits upon crunches under the Caribbean beneath the arc of the Antilles from Puerto Rico to Trinidad in a subduction zone that is some 50 million years old. 
Though small in square miles, the islands once loomed large in agriculture and global trade. European settlers of the 17th century tilled the rich volcanic soil, while the mountains and ridges caught rain clouds needed for irrigation. The stone sugar mills that still dot many fields in the region ground out fortunes for the lucky few. 
Situation Unknown.
No one ever knows how much time will pass between eruptions. It could be decades. It could be centuries. On Martinique, for example, after erupting in 1792 and again in 1851-52, Mount Pelée let loose in 1902 with the most lethal volcanic action of this century. A searing cloud of ash and incandescent rocks roiled through the nearby city of St. Pierre-known as the Paris of the Caribbean-and killed nearly 30,000 residents in the most lethal volcanic action of this century. 
Scientists back then knew little about how volcanoes worked and were unable to read the warning signs: small puffs of ash, rumbling, and the persistent smell of sulfur. Now in such a situation the area would be evacuated well in advance. 
A Broken Silence.
Erupting in the early 1600s, Montserrat's volcano sat silent until July 18, 1995. Since then, activity has prompted three evacuations of the surrounding southern part of the island: the first on August 21, 1995; the second on December 1 of that year; and the third, which began on April 3, 1996 and continues today. 
About 3,200 residents now live on a crescent of land at the very north of the 39-square-miles (63-square-kilometer) British overseas territory. Of the 8,000 others who have fled, 3,000 are in Britain, 3,000 in Antigua, and the remainder elsewhere. Most intend to return after the volcano simmers down-which could be years from now, scientists say. 
A Question of Timing.
When the lushly forested Soufriere Hills peak first sent an ash cloud skyward in July 1995, Montserratians were astonished. The peak had been quiet for almost 400 years. Exactly what sequence of events will follow is anyone's guess. There are a number of things that can happen, and they don't follow the same order every time at every volcano. 
Exceptional Behavior.
On Montserrat, magma is pushing up into the crater, creating a bulging dome of jagged gray rock. When the sides of the growing dome become too steep, rock avalanches away. Large avalanches can become deadly pyroclastic flows-huge, hot clouds of rock, ash and hot gas that race down the sides of the mountain. 
This exposes the fresh, underlying magma. In a flash, gases in the magma expand like the bubbles in a bottle of uncorked champagne and KABOOM-the volcano explodes, releasing stones and hot ash that sometimes rises several miles into the air. Repeating the cycle again and again, dome growth and explosion have slowly escalated in scale at Soufriere Hills. 
Such behavior is the exception rather than the rule, though. On St. Lucia, down the Caribbean arc of the Antilles about 200 miles (322 kilometers), visitors can walk into the Sulphur Springs crater. Since the last explosion in 1766, magma has stopped rising, and the slow, steady release of gases has defused the danger.
The First Fatalities
Soufriere Hills let go with its most recent large blast on December 26, 1997. As the southwestern side of the dome collapsed, a cloud of ash, rock, and superheated gases-called a pyroclastic flow-raced down the mountain to the sea at more than 100 miles (161 kilometers) an hour. 
Villages such as St. Patrick's-long since evacuated-were destroyed, and the delta formed at the mouth of the White River by previous ash flows grew even larger. Six months earlier, similar flows down valleys to the east had reached the airport and killed 20 people who had ignored evacuation orders-the first and only fatalities of Montserrat's volcano crisis so far. 
In the Path of Danger.
Some explosions on Montserrat have thrown a rain of pumice pebbles onto villages such as Cork Hill and Salem several miles northeast of the crater. Closer in, sizzling rocks the size of watermelons have landed like bombs, leaving craters in farmers' fields and setting homes ablaze. 
Phenomenal Hazards.
Lava - the magma that spills out of a volcano - doesn't run like a river at Soufriere Hills. The lava's high silica content makes it so thick that it often squeezes out of the dome in massive pillars called spines. At night short spurts of lava and hot rocks tumbling from the dome often glow against the darkness. 
Along with eruptions, earthquakes pose hazards in subduction zones. Serious shaking in the 1930s damaged buildings on Montserrat, but no one understood then how the grinding interaction between tectonic plates and the movement of magma each causes shaking. 
A Volcanic Winter.
Ash is the nuisance that reminds everyone every day that an active volcano smolders nearby. Although the north of Montserrat is much less affected, and a good rain there still makes the green hues of mango trees and coconut palms sparkle, a serious ashing can make life miserable. Ash insinuates itself everywhere, even through the tiniest of cracks. It chokes gardens, kills the grass in pastures, and makes roads slippery. 
The Stranglehold of Ash.
Falling ash feels as light as snow on the skin, but its great cumulative weight can collapse roofs. Shoveling it off means a major sweat. It travels on the trade winds, dusting neighboring islands such as Saba, St. Kitts, and St. Maarten. It has occasionally shut down the neighboring airports of Guadeloupe and Antigua. 
In the long run, breathing it day in and day out could bring on a deadly disease called silicosis, which thickens lung tissue and causes severe shortness of breath. Scientists monitoring the situation urge Montserratians to wear dust masks after eruptions foul the air. 
Where Next?
Mexico's Popocatepetl volcano is now also periodically spewing ash. In June 1997, during the mountain's biggest blast in 70 years, winds swept the erupted black cloud to Mexico City some 30 miles (48 kilometers) to the northwest, which forced the capital's airport to close. 

*
Photographer Vince Musi and writer Ann Williams visited Montserrat in April and September 1996 for their July 1997 NATIONAL GEOGRAPHIC magazine story, "Montserrat: Under the Volcano." 
What preparations did you make for the assignment? 
We didn't really know what to expect. There wasn't a lot of news coming out of there that I could rely on, and I was really trying to track down whether I'd be able to get a helicopter, how I'd get to the island, and whether I could survive on the island if the thing really did blow. 
What kind of advice did you get? 
Mostly identifying different smells and colors of the plume and a real crash course in volcanology and these particular kinds of volcanoes. They are risky because they don't have a great build-up. They can go at any time and they go big. They're explosive in nature, whereas you can almost run away from the lava-producing ones. 
This type of an explosive situation puts up baseball-sized chunks of pumice and rock and all kinds of things that can hit anywhere. The radius, I think, the impact from Mount Saint Helens, was 60 square miles (97 square kilometers). The size of Montserrat alone is only 39 square miles (63 square kilometers). So, the distance even from the south end to the north end of the island is less than five miles (eight kilometers). So, there aren't a whole lot of places to go or hide. And that to me was the biggest fear. 
Did you encounter the conditions such as you feared while you were there? 
No. When I was there, and like a lot of the residents, I never was really in much danger, although I was always scolded for going to too many places by the scientists. And maybe taking a few too many chances. You know there's something about these things that they draw you into it. They're like a vortex or looking at a hypnotic chart and you realize the danger as you get there, and when you get there you're just drawn to it, and you don't want to leave. 
How did conditions differ on the island between the two trips you took? 
Places that I had been and photographed on the first trip were wiped out on the second trip. Initially that area was very, very dangerous, but didn't appear so. Even though the ground was hot-and being there, it was thrilling. And in that same spot months later, you know, it looks like a war zone. It's bleak and gray and the trees are black and singed. 
How close did you actually end up getting to the volcano? 
I landed on it, in the helicopter, while it was still flying, and very, very close. We were flying in a small Belljet ranger helicopter. It's a jet helicopter. So, the real danger is more if the volcano explodes or if ash gets in the turbines. But we flew into it and landed on it. I threw a roll of film into the volcano when I first got there for good luck with a note on it. 
How would you describe it? 
Most of the time, there was a din, a roar from it, a rumbling, like prolonged thunder that trails off in the distance. 
And when you get real close to it, closer than you should be, you can feel the heat under your feet. You're standing on a foot of ash, but maybe a foot or two under the ground, it's several hundred degrees. And you can actually feel it and realize just how vulnerable you are to this thing, that it can go. 
There was a night when the late light was beautiful, visibility of the volcano was great, and the volcano was very active, and I sat on a hill photographing it with my partner Ann Williams, the reporter and writer of the magazine story. 
It was a Sunday and you could hear throughout the valley the people that were living in the evacuated area were singing gospel songs on their porch, and this was punctuated by dogs barking and chickens, and I had my little radio which I kept with me, just in case the radio would say, "It's really bad, get out of there." And I turned on the radio and they were playing Mozart's requiem. I said, "Well, get ready. I think we're being pulled up here. I'm going to make this last roll of film and then we're going to get hauled up." 
Would you like to go back? 
Yes, I think I would. There's a part of me that would like to go back and continue following it. I don't think that this story is over by any means, and I don't think the impact, the story of the impact is felt yet. So there's a lot more to do down there. And I would like to go back.

*
Spouting fire from the belly of the Earth, volcanoes have both fascinated and terrorized humans since ancient times. Most feared are explosive eruptions that can quickly envelope their surroundings with clouds of killer heat. 
They died where they stood. Violently, with almost no warning. A highborn woman with her jewels. An armed soldier. A baby. Some were found in the rubble clinging to each other, as if for solace, in that awful moment when hot death came raging down the side of a mountain with the speed of a hurricane. 
Almost 2,000 years ago a seaside town in southern Italy had the misfortune of being in the shadow of Mount Vesuvius-one of Europe's active volcanoes-at the wrong time. Buried beneath 100 feet (30 meters) of sediment from that August night in A.D. 79, and from many more eruptions since, the 16,000 corpses of Herculaneum and neighboring Pompeii bear silent witness to the destructive force of volcanoes. 
Objects of terror and fascination since the beginning of human time, they take their name from Vulcan, the Roman god of fire. Today some 550 are active across the globe, with 500 million people living in their dangerous shadows. At any given moment, somewhere between one dozen and two dozen are spewing ash and molten rock from the Earth's belly. 
Death by volcano can come in many forms. In 1815, history's deadliest eruption claimed 92,000 lives in Indonesia. But only 12,000 died from the blast; the rest starved after their crops and livestock were destroyed. In 1883, 36,000 people died from a 100-foot- (30 meter-) high tsunami created by the eruption of Krakatau in the Sunda Strait between Java and Sumatra. A fast-moving cloud of hot gases killed 30,000 in Martinique during the 1902 eruption of Pelé, and in 1985, a tidal wave of mud from Nevado del Ruiz smothered and crushed 23,000 citizens of Colombia. 
Watching a volcanic eruption is as close as any human is likely to come to seeing the titanic forces that are at work in the interior of the planet. 
The Earth's metallic core is cloaked by a mantle of molten rock, which is in a constant state of agitation as it rises, cools, and sinks. Tremendous pressures build up beneath the Earth's relatively thin crust-the ground on which we walk. This endless churning has split the surface into 20 or so rocky slabs, or plates, that slowly drift about on the mantle. Every so often, like a shaken bottle of carbonated soda, hot, liquefied, gas-infused rock called magma squirts out the top in the form of lava. 
Sometimes the eruption is sudden and violent, as was the case at Mount St. Helens in southwestern Washington State in 1980, and at the Philippines' Mount Pinatubo in 1991. At other times-depending on the nature of the magma-eruptions are relatively slow and quiet. People had plenty of time to get out of the way of Hawaii's Mauna Loa volcano in 1984. Its lava crept down the slope at about the speed of thick honey.
Although Pinatubo's eruption in 1991 caused nearly 900 deaths, many more lives would have been taken had it not been for the scientists who predicted the event. 
The science of predictions involves noting changes in a volcano's shape, tracking seismic activity, and monitoring emissions of water vapor and other gases. Increasingly high-technology tools have been used in recent years. A process known as seismic tomography uses x-ray technology to help locate magma miles below the Earth's surface. 
But as sophisticated as these techniques have become, predictions are still imprecise, and local residents are reluctant to evacuate unless they think danger is imminent. Sometimes that awareness arrives too late. 
Volcanologists come from several scientific disciplines. Geophysicists and geochemists study the deepest subterranean causes of volcanoes. Geologists delve into their prehistoric records. Meteorologists observe the effects of dusts and gases as they burst into the atmosphere and sometimes travel around the globe. 
Members of this international fraternity of scientists call themselves "living geologists." Three of them, young American geologist Harry Glicken, and veterans Maurice and Katia Krafft of France, perished in the spring of 1991 while filming an eruption near the town of Shimabara, Japan. A heat cloud from an explosion of lava near the top of the volcano enveloped the trio. They died instantly, along with a number of Japanese journalists, cab drivers and farmers-in all, 43 more victims of the ancient furnace that smolders below. 

*
Are Volcanic Eruptions Tied to Lunar Cycle? 
Brian Handwerk
For National Geographic News
February 15, 2002

The horrors unleashed by the recent eruption of Congo's Mount Nyiragongo have demonstrated once again our uneasy relationship with the fires that rage below Earth's surface. 

In January, tons of molten rock from Nyiragongo streamed into the city of Goma, demolishing many of its neighborhoods and killing dozens of people. It was a harsh reminder that, although volcanoes have been ravaging populated areas throughout history, we still lack the ability to accurately predict deadly eruptions and save lives. 

If predicting eruptions is a confusing puzzle, volcano hunters Steve and Donna O'Meara believe that they may have identified a key piece. The husband-and-wife team are investigating a connection that some volcano watchers have noted since early times, but none has adequately studied-the role of the moon in affecting volcanic activity.
The O'Mearas' interest in this lunar theory began by chance back in 1996, while the duo was studying an erupting volcano in the field. Steve is an astronomer by training, and it was his experience in this seemingly unrelated field that led him to a fateful discovery. 
While compiling detailed journals of his scientific observations, he began to notice a correlation between increasing volcanic activity and lunar cycles. Pouring through stacks of data he had collected over twenty years in the field, Steve examined past eruptions and saw some of the same patterns. Further research suggested that a lunar pattern was also apparent in some famous historic eruptions, such as Krakatoa in 1883. 
Other observers throughout history had noted the possibility of such a connection, but always as a footnote, and always when looking back at eruptions that had already occurred. No one had given the matter comprehensive study, and no one had attempted to employ these lunar patterns as one of the tools to predict future volcanic eruptions.
Stromboli, a Volcanic Hotspot 
Supported by the National Geographic Society, the husband-and-wife team set out to test just that possibility at one of Earth's volcanic hotspots, the summit of Stromboli on Italy's Aeolian Islands. 
Stromboli is one of the most active volcanoes on the planet. The restless mountain has been in a state of nearly continuous eruption for at least 2,000 years. Although large eruptions and lava flows are uncommon, smaller eruptions occur very frequently and often hurl blobs of lava above the crater rim. 
Stromboli's slopes can be inhospitable. Visitors have to contend with toxic gases, noxious fumes, and showers of hot ash. While on site the team (composed of Steve, Donna, and several research assistants) also endured unusually brutal weather conditions at their mountaintop camp. Yet, fueled by their enthusiasm, they carried on making observations 24 hours a day, working in six-hour shifts. Despite the skepticism of some volcanologists, the group was determined to put the lunar theory to the test. 
Although living conditions on Stromboli left much to be desired, the climate was ideal for research because of the continually active eruptions and the occurrence of several important lunar events. The moon entered some important phases during the team's time on Stromboli. In the 14-day span of observations the moon reached perigee (the point when its orbit is nearest the Earth) and also experienced a full moon phase. The full moon is a point at which the moon exerts particularly great influence on the Earth, as evidenced by high tides. 
The team's task was to determine when the greatest peaks in eruption activity occurred, and what connection the increased activity might have with the moon's gravitational pull. Following the patterns they had seen in the past, the O'Mearas predicted that during the volcano's ongoing eruptions, there would be peaks in volcanic activity at perigee and at full moon. In this case, events bore out that hypothesis and in fact the greatest spike in volcanic activity occurred at a point in time just between full moon and perigee. 
Volcanoes Under Gravity's Law 
As exciting as the O'Mearas' investigations may be, Steve cautions that they cannot be considered independently of other volcanic variables. "We're not saying that by simply following the moon we can predict when a volcano will erupt," he notes. He does, however, advocate including the moon in the equation for predicting eruptions, with other more traditional variables.
"A volcanic eruption is a chaotic event," Steve says. "In order to predict such an event you must know all of the variables involved. Gravity is one of Earth's strongest forces, so you can't ignore the moon. The challenge is to find out just how it's playing a role." 
On Sunday, February 17, at 8 p.m. ET/5 p.m. PT on MSNBC in the United States, National Geographic EXPLORER joins volcano hunters Steve and Donna O'Meara for two perilous weeks atop one of the world's most active hot spots, Stromboli, in Italy's Aeolian Islands.

New light might be shed on predicting volcanic eruptions based on research conducted at the Aletotian islands. Research finds that volcanic eruptions may be linked to changes in lunar cycles.

Expeditions Council 

Volcano researchers Stephen and Donna O'Meara founded Volcano Watch International to better understand Earth's active volcanoes and to help save the lives of people living on or near dangerous volcanoes. For the last 22 years, the O'Mearas have traveled the globe, documenting volcanic eruptions on film and video and visiting over 100 volcanoes. 
Stephen and Donna O'Meara are among a group of explorers and adventurers supported by the National Geographic Society's Expeditions Council. 

*
February 1993
Venus revealed.
By William Newcott.

VOLCANISM
More than 80 percent of Venus is covered with lava flows and plains and other volcanic features. It is easy to see why: The planet has 430 volcanoes 12 miles or more in diameter and tens of thousands of smaller ones. Magellan saw arachnoids (left), which are surrounded by spiderweb-like fractures. Similar to other circular features called coronae, arachnoids most likely form when magma rises to just below the surface, causing the ground to bulge and fracture. Cooling and retreat of the magma result in collapse of the center.
Meandering north of Aphrodite Terra is a channel (below) a mile wide and 4,225 miles long. Probably etched into the rocky crust by molten lava, it would reach from New York to Rome.

THE FIRES BELOW.
Among the regions of Venus that resemble Earth is the vast highland area called Beta Regio. Here Devana Chasma (facing page), a rift valley, has torn apart an impact crater as the crust ruptures and spreads. Straddling the rift at lower left is the volcano Theia Mons. A
similar relationship between tectonic and volcanic processes is seen on Earth along the East African Rift System.
Seemingly overcooked in the Venusian oven, so-called pancakes - steep-sided volcanic domes - (below) are not as alien as they might seem. The state of California is dotted with similar structures, caused by lava oozing through the Earth's crust and cooling as it spreads in a circular pattern.
The difference is that on Earth volcanic landscapes are soon overgrown with plants and eroded by wind and water. On lifeless Venus a lava structure will stay pristine until altered by another geologic event. For example, newer pancakes look much the same as the ones on which they are superimposed.
Thus in studying Venus, geologists can look at our own planet's complex volcanic history, minus the effects of time. Venus is a smorgasbord of volcanic formations (diagram). Heat generated by radioactive decay in the planet's interior creates pockets of molten rock. The temperature, composition, and gas content of the magma determine whether the resulting lava has the viscosity of motor oil or toothpaste. And that helps determine the size and shape of the formations.


We are standing on the brink ot a rift valley that cuts across a great lava plain between two-mile-high Sif Mons, left, and Gula Mons, a half mile higher. Each volcano is about 200 miles across. Elevations here and in the perspective on pages 37-39 have been exaggerated by computer to emphasize subtle differences in relief. This technique is also used by oceanographers to create ocean-floor maps. The orange tint approximates the color the human eye would see as a result of sunlight filtering though Venus's cloud cover, based on Soviet lander observation.

TECTONICS
long with volcanism, tectonics has shaped the face of Venus. On
1A Earth tectonics involves lateral movements of crustal plates, creating the Himalaya and deep-ocean trenches (diagrams). Magellan has shown that Venus has its own, more localized style of tectonics.
Both planets have vast churning reservoirs of hot material beneath their crusts. On Earth lava often emerges from the mantle through mid-ocean ridges, creating a new, spreading seafloor. The seafloor subducts under the continents, generating volcanoes and deforming the continental margin
Venus also has mantle upwelling, which forms highlands such as Beta Regio. I Hot-spot volcanoes and coronae also form over mantle plumes. Similar hot spots on Earth
formed the Hawaiian Island chain and are responsible for the thermal activity at Yellowstone. Upwelling can also cause the crust to rupture and spread, forming rift valleys with steep sides and sunken floors.

Overall, plate tectonics on Earth is a dramatically horizontal process, creating whole ocean floors and moving continents. On Venus the movement is thought to be largely vertical. Volcanoes and highland regions arise over mantle upwellings, while sinking regions may form mountain belts due to thickening and compression of the crust. The eastern slope of Freyja Montes (left) in Ishtar Terra has undergone uplift and compression but is now fracturing as portions of the crust collapse under their own weight.
The lack of surface water and strong winds means that Venus's features are largely preserved between periods of volcanic or tectonic activity. That's good news for scientists who study mountains here on Earth. Erosion from rain, wind, and glaciers, as well as breakdown from the freeze-thaw cycle, have long since removed the outer layers of our oldest mountain chains, leaving only their cores. Thanks to Magellan's images we can get some idea of how Earth's great mountain ranges would appear in the absence of erosion.

REWORKING THE SURFACE.
Everywhere on Venus is evidence of the complex interplay of volcanic, tectonic, and impact processes (left). A large corona is rimmed by fractures and faults, while remnant pieces of jumbled tessera, at right, stand high above the plains. Low-lying areas here in the Lada Terra region of the southern hemisphere have been filled in with molten rock. Like giant handprints in concrete, two impact craters leave signatures on a lava plain to the right of the corona.
Also in Lada Terra, a flow of lava from the Ammavaru Caldera has broken through a ridge of hills 185 miles to its east (right). Lava flowing through this small breach created a plain the size of Kentucky.
The irony is this: Much of the surface of Venus is covered with lava, and tens of thousands of volcanoes have been identified. But planetary scientists have yet to find a "smoking volcano," evidence of current eruptive activity on the surface, in part because Magellan's radar was not designed to detect atmospheric plumes.
When was the last major episode of volcanism? Some scientists say the long process of resurfacing is a constant cycle taking place at random spots around the planet as individual volcanoes rumble into action. But if this is so, then why has lava spilled into just 4 percent of the impact craters?
Most experts now think that the crust of Venus may have been flooded during widespread volcanism that ended about 500 million years ago.
Such global resurfacing may have occurred when crust became weakened by intense heat and was dragged down into the mantle.
What theory will finally prevail? Gravity studies by the Magellan team may help settle the question. In addition, American and Russian space scientists are already huddling in the hope of putting another lander on Venus in a joint mission to try to find out.
As usual in scientific endeavors, new understanding has given rise to new, more intriguing questions.

*
vol 202, n°2, August 2002.
Fuji, Japan's sacred summit.
On fire - near the churning heart of Mount Fuji, revelers march with a flaming shrine to venerate the volcano during Fujinomiya's annual Gojinka Festival.

0nly fear of Fuji's fury may run deeper than devotion in Japan's collective consciousness. Records show that since 81 the mountain has erupted at least ten times, with flaming skies and molten rivers. Its last blowout, in 1707, followed a colossal earthquake estimated today at magnitude 8.4. (The 1995 Kobe quake, which killed 6,400 and caused massive structural damage, registered 7.2.) It cratered Fuji's southeast face, raining ash so thick, one diarist noted, "We lighted candles even in the daytime."
Old phobias rekindled two years ago when Motoo Ukawa and his colleagues at the National Research Institute for Earth Science and Disaster Prevention near Tokyo detected a surge in seismic activity under Fuji's cone. "Low-frequency earthquakes;' said Ukawa as he clicked on a computer screen to reveal a contour map swarming with tiny red splotches. "We think they're related to deep magma flows."
Ukawa, the institute's director of eruption prediction, stood next to me in his monitoring lab where machines receive data from seismometers planted around Fuji, sent in over telephone lines 24 hours a day. Yet Ukawa, a shy man of 47, confessed he couldn't say why the low-frequency quakes had continued to worry his machines with readouts that looked like heart attacks on graph paper.
Unlike ordinary fault-slip earthquakes, Ukawa's tremors are usually imperceptible and so numerous they're measured in bursts. Unlocking the mystery of what triggers them, he and others believe, will provide a key to predicting when Fuji, the biggest of Japan's 86 active volcanoes, might roar back to life.
Time is of the essence because Fuji's next blowout could cause havoc, immolating the used car dealerships, fast-food pit stops, and housing developments along the mountain's encircling highways. Worse, it could spew deadly ash and gases over the greater Tokyo area, where a quarter of the country's 127 million people now live and work.
So far, Fuji's mini-quakes have stayed put6 to 12 miles below the surface, a depth Ukawa believes argues against imminent explosion. "But we've got to be prepared," he warned.

Eyeing another explosion?
Almost 300 years have passed since Mount Fuji last erupted, and no one knows how long this lull will last. Sitting atop the Ring of Fire - a geologic seam of colliding tectonic plates that arcs around the Pacific Ocean - Fuji has erupted at least ten times since the eight century (map, below). Layer upon layer of lava and ash has helped make Fuji the tallest mountain in Japan.
The last time Fuji exploded, in 1707, it belched a cloud of ash that blanketed Tokyo, 70 miles away. A period drawing of that eruption is held as an heirloom by Fumio Takiguchi (right). His family received it generations ago from an itinerant artist, who offered the sketch to pay for room and board. "It may be dangerous to live here, but we take it seriously," says Takiguchi, who wisely has mapped out evacuation plans for his family from their home in Gotemba. Based on recent data, some vulcanologists suspect Fuji may soon blow again.

<#CG>
*
IT IS HARD for most people - but not for 38-year-old volcanologist Catherine Hickson - to imagine the catastrophe that once occurred here, 160 kilometres north of Vancouver: an entire mountain exploding apart; the sky roiling and lit by hundreds of lightning bolts; the air raining 600 C mud and semi-solid boulders; the surrounding forest engulfed in ash and enormous avalanches of hot rocks, its Douglas firs half-buried and carbonized, flaming like matchsticks from their broken tips. The land here on this late-October day shows only aspen yellowing along the grey churn of British Columbia's Lillooet River and fresh snow on the nearby serrations of Plinth Peak, Mount Meager and Capricorn Mountain. The sky is calm. But 2,350 years ago, 2,604-metre Mount Meager - just a few kilometres from where we now stand - was blasted an estimated 25 kilometres skyward with the power of 10 hydrogen bombs. Some of it fell straight down in a cataclysm of super-heated blocks of semi-solid rock that accumulated in a metres-thick layer over this valley. Some of it fell as much as 1,000 kilometres away. The explosion ranks in intensity with the May 18, 1980, eruption of Mount St. Helens in Washington state. At 8:32 that morning, Hickson - then a geology student - watched as that mountain blew up, duplicating the earlier Canadian blast. Fifty-seven people, including three geologists, died that day. Hickson is one of the few people who stood near the American volcano and lived to tell the tale. The event changed her life. Today, as Hickson's eyes survey the quiet summits above, there is a noticeable regret in her voice when she says, "Our volcanoes aren't active right now." Although she almost died escaping the mud slides and rain of pumice from Mount St. Helens, Hickson - like all of Canada's volcanologists - yearns for one of the 100 or so volcanoes in Western Canada to ignite. It would be an opportunity to determine what is happening beneath the five major volcanic zones in British Columbia and the Yukon. It would give Hickson the chance to pull on her boots and packsack and to fill up more of her red-covered Geological Survey of Canada notebooks. And it would send her back to those days of childhood when she would light firecrackers and volcano cones at her family's cottage on the shores of Alberta's Lac la Biche, running around scared and delighted by the eruptions. Standing on the eroded flank of Mount Meager, seeing what she sees, the earth itself becomes alive for Hickson. She bends - her hair an explosion of dark curls beneath a faded, floral tractor cap - and pulls from the cliffside some long-buried moss. "This was on the surface 2,350 years ago," she explains. She reads stratigraphy in the rocks, messages in an arcane igneous script that she translates. "It was a big explosion," Hickson says, as we study the river's escarpment. What was the original forest floor before Mount Meager erupted is now covered with five metres of grey pumice and mottled blocks of rock called bread-crust bombs, hurled out in the volcano's initial eruptions. This searing material fell on the forest here, turning the still-standing firs to columns of carbon that now protrude like enigmatical monoliths from the base of the eroding cliff. Above these charcoal trunks, arching over our heads, is 15 metres of grey rock that marks the volcano's catastrophic stage: a gaseous blast that shot millions of tonnes of debris into the stratosphere, an amount so dense that it cascaded from the sky onto the mountain's flanks in an avalanche of scalding ash, molten rock and burning trees. This debris flow raced down these slopes with the speed of a runaway freight train, inundating everything in its 15-kilometre-long path. The debris solidified, interring parts of the valley beneath 30 more metres of columnar dacite. Above us today, Mount Meager is silent. A 100-metre-high lava dome and a stubby tongue of black lava mark the now-dead vent that produced one of Canada's most devastating eruptions. But nearby, an isolated hot spring on Meager Creek intimates that, deep down, the earth still has fire in its belly. In fact, there is evidence of volcanic activity all along the country's western perimeter - some ancient, some dating to the last few centuries. Much of this is the result of the movement of tectonic plates that make up the earth's crust. Two of the thinner, seven-kilometre-thick oceanic plates that abut British Columbia are grinding against and, in places, moving under the continent's 30-kilometre-thick crustal plate. This movement, once theorized as continental drift, was a vague and much maligned idea when Hickson was a child. Since then, geophysicists have unravelled the mysteries of the planet's depths. The pieces of a complex geological puzzle have been assembled and the theory of continental drift has evolved into the present-day theory of plate tectonics. One of Hickson's mentors is Jack Souther, a semi-retired volcanologist who has spent over half his life with the Geological Survey of Canada. They met originally over a decade ago when Souther was giving a lecture on Mount St. Helens and Hickson introduced herself and told him that she was there when it erupted. Souther listened to her astounding account and felt a twinge of envy that she had experienced what he has only dreamed of experiencing: a volcano at the moment of self-destruction. "It was like the whole force of Mount St. Helens had fired her," says Souther. He took her to Mount Meager where they pounded rocks and talked volcanoes. He took her, as his assistant, to two of the other vast volcanic belts in central and northern British Columbia, and they talked the chemistry of dacite and rhyolite, pyroclastic flows, plate tectonics and the history of the planet. He suspected she would follow in his footsteps. "Volcanoes are windows to the depths of the earth," Souther says. "But what makes them exciting is they are a living experience. They're very, very abrupt. You can see the process. We can look at what comes up and check on geophysicists' interpretations of what's happening in the earth's core now." What is happening volcanically in Western Canada is not nearly as simple as what is happening south of the 49th parallel or elsewhere around much of the Pacific. The "Ring of Fire" - that arc of volcanic and earthquake activity that circles the Pacific Ocean - has a 1,800-kilometre-long gap of recent inactivity that, curiously, spans British Columbia and the Yukon. The chain of classic stratovolcanoes that marches northward along the western coast of the United States - including Mount Shasta, Mount Hood, Mount St. Helens, Mount Adams and Mount Rainier - ends at Mount Baker, about 25 kilometres south of the Canadian border near Chilliwack. The cones begin again in Alaska. But in Western Canada, different tectonic activity beneath the earth's crust and more intense erosional activities on the surface have deprived the land of classically shaped, Fujiyama-style volcanoes. There are three reasons for this. The great chains of volcanoes that border much of the Pacific result primarily because the sediment-laden, moisture-saturated ocean bottom is moving downward and under the continents' perimeters. These subducting slabs, as they are known, gradually heat up and eventually melt within the 1,175 C cauldron of the earth's semi-solid mantle. In the process, tremendous amounts of liquids and gases are given off, causing the underside of the continental crust to melt. The newly formed magmas - the molten rock material from which igneous rocks are formed - churning in slow convection currents, rise up through fissures inland from the continents' edges, melting more crustal rock, often erupting at regular intervals and building up classic volcanoes. But in British Columbia and the Yukon, things are more complex. The three oceanic plates off the B.C. coast are, volcanically speaking, misbehaving. The small Juan de Fuca Plate along the coast of Vancouver Island has - after building up a range of volcanoes in the Cascade Range of the U.S. Northwest and the Coast Mountains north of Vancouver - slowed down, and the Explorer Plate may even have ceased subducting. The last hurrah in the Garibaldi Volcanic Belt may have been the eruption of Mount Meager. The Pacific Plate, after building the Wrangell Volcanic Belt in the Yukon, has apparently changed direction and is now slipping northwest, sliding more directly under Alaska where it produced two major volcanic eruptions in the past four years - Redoubt Volcano and Mount Spurr. With this gradual cessation in subduction beneath much of British Columbia, the old coastal volcanoes - some, like Meager, which have been active for two million years - are no longer being rapidly rebuilt. Furthermore, the effects of massive Ice Age glaciation and more recent erosion of the lightweight pumice and tephra that make up most volcanoes' cones means Western Canada's volcanoes simply do not look like volcanoes. Their summits have collapsed and their flanks have crumbled in huge debris avalanches. All that is left in most cases - Mount Meager is a good example - are cathedral-like spires of weather-resistant lava domes and dykes. However, this very shift in tectonic movements that has subdued British Columbia's two coastal volcanic zones has produced two other major interior zones - the Wells-Clearwater Volcanic Field and the Stikine Volcanic Belt - the latter the site of Canada's youngest volcanoes, including the Tseax River Cone which erupted as recently as 200 years ago. In his office a few doors away from Hickson's, Souther stretches his hands out, palms down, thumb to thumb. He moves his hands to illustrate how the Pacific Plate is sliding parallel along the edge of the North American Plate, ripping apart regions of British Columbia through sheer friction. This is the second way volcanoes form: through rifting. The deep fractures in the continental crust are responsible for both the Wells Gray-Clearwater field and the Stikine belt, which includes the Mount Edziza Volcanic Field, a huge complex of vast lava flows, obsidian-rich cliffs, canary-yellow sulphurous ridges, and a series of tiny, perfect 150-metre-high cinder cones that date from about 1,000 years ago. It is a place Souther knows better than anyone else. The brightly coloured geological map on his office wall is the result of years of traipsing - sometimes with Hickson - the eroded contours of the Edziza plateau, piecing together the volcanic history of one of Canada's most spectacular landscapes. He recalls with fondness being snowed in and fogbound for two days on Edziza's slopes, Hickson producing from the seemingly bottomless depths of her packsack a bag of unpopped popcorn which provided a little ammunition against the cold night. Hickson's own area of field research, and the place where she has spent three or four mosquito-filled months during each of the past five summers, is at the eastern end of a 500-kilometre-long series of volcanoes - called the Anahim Volcanic Belt - that bisects south-central British Columbia. Unlike the province's four other volcanic regions that are each linked to the movement of ocean plates under or along the continental crust, the Anahim belt is an anomaly: a line of volcanoes running perpendicular to the coast, decreasing in age from 12 million years in the west to a few thousand years in the east. This curious alignment now seems to be the surface expression of the third way volcanoes form. As with the Hawaiian volcanoes and the geysers of Yellowstone National Park, where Hickson got her first sulphurous whiff of volcanism in action, the Anahim belt is apparently caused by a "hotspot." This is a place where slow convection currents in the earth's semi-solid mantle well up hotter than the surrounding mantle, burning a hole in the planet's solid crust as if a monstrous blowtorch were scorching it from the underside. In British Columbia, the North American Plate has drifted slowly westward over the millennia, at a rate of two centimetres a year or 20 kilometres in a million years, passing over the Anahim hotspot. In the process, a chain of volcanic rocks trending eastward was etched onto the land, each new vent a little younger than its western neighbour. These vents culminate in the post-glacial cinder cones and lava flows of the Nazko area west of Quesnel. Hickson will be there this summer, collecting rocks, mapping, calculating - among other things - the direction of this drifting continent. The pack horses of early days are now replaced by all-terrain vehicles, but little else has changed. She carries with her all the daily supplies of a field geologist: a geological hammer, an altimeter and compass, a backpack with 10 to 12 kilograms of rock specimens, a traverse vest's pocket crammed with maps, air photos, a hand lens, and a day's supply of gorp. She keeps a loaded shotgun handy as well, ever since the day she had to face a charging grizzly with an empty one when she misplaced its shells. As she assesses the track of these "hotspot" eruptions across British Columbia, it amuses her that, given the eastward trend of this volcanism, it is possible to predict volcanoes beneath Edmonton, her home town, in a few million years. Hickson grew up in a family that loved the wilderness: the cottage on a northern lake, the hunting and fishing, the bonfires, the long hikes and camping trips. She collected her first rock - a piece of volcanic snowflake obsidian - at age five on a trip to Yellowstone National Park. She still has it today. She also collected insects, leaves, shells and bones. It was not until she moved to Vancouver in 1978 and studied geology in her first year at the University of British Columbia that her interest in nature coalesced. "It was a revelation," she says of the introductory course. "Here were explanations of the Rockies, the Grand Canyon, Yellowstone. I was fascinated by the process of geology - the land as we see it today. You can see a river flow, waves crash on a beach. You can read the record of geologic change in the rocks. I was less interested in the chemistry and the structure. I didn't want to be esoteric. I wanted to smell pine needles, live in tents, be outdoors." That is where she was at 8:32 a.m., May 18, 1980: seated in the front seat of a Renault station wagon with her then husband, Paul, eating breakfast, 14 kilometres east of Mount St. Helens, bored from the previous day's fruitless watching of the steaming volcano. Suddenly, her husband shouted, "Look at that!" Hickson looked. The entire northeastern flank of Mount St. Helens - 2.3 cubic kilometres of solid rock - had begun sliding downhill in the largest observed landslide in recorded history. "It's happening!" Hickson said. The two dashed from their vehicle, Paul recording the instant of the blast with his camera. The colossal landslide sheered off the top of a plugged underground vent containing pressurized, superheated water and molten dacite, releasing a stupendous, ever-expanding cloud of steam, ash and pumice that rolled upward and outward toward the stunned couple. "It was amazing. It was unbelievable. I was - agog," Hickson says of that moment. For nearly a minute they watched the cloud billow outward, and only then did they realize that the pyroclastic surge - a 300 C wave of vaporized debris - imperilled them as much as the estimated 28,000 people who died in the 1902 eruption of Martinique's Mount Pelée. The cloud cascaded down the volcano's slopes and then over an intervening ridge in a boiling, grey, 2,000-metre-high wave of ash and pulverized rock. Thousands of tons of metre-wide boulders - "ballistics" in volcanological jargon - rained from the sky. They fled. Frightened elk stampeded along their only route of escape, a narrow logging road. The pyroclastic cloud pursued them. "What's happening?" Hickson's husband asked as they careered down the road. Hickson, looking out the rear window, saw the sky filling up with roiling clouds, illuminated on the underside by bizarre blue lightning bolts caused by static electricity from the interaction of ash particles in the dry air. "Don't look. Drive! Just drive!" she yelled. It began to rain mud and walnut-sized pieces of pumice. Day turned to night. Their windshield wipers could barely cut through the build-up of mud. Hot avalanches of chocolate-coloured debris destroyed all but one of the bridges along their escape route. The air shook with horrible crackles and roaring as millions of tonnes of mountain erupted skyward. She kept looking up, expecting to see big blocks of rock falling from the sky. "I've always had an interest in the power of nature," she says from the comfort of her sixth-floor Vancouver office where she works as a research scientist for the Geological Survey of Canada. "I grew up in northern Alberta and we'd have massive thunderstorms and snowstorms and I'd think: 'Man is pretty insignificant.' At Mount St. Helens I felt not just insignificant, but completely insignificant. It was the earth itself alive! You see a big eruption like that and you get a great sense of the power of nature." Around her as she talks, her office is a clutter - in piles of almost geological depth - of academic papers, slides of the world's volcanoes, igneous rock samples, field notebooks, dog-eared maps, animal skulls, lava bombs and technical books. On the walls around her are 16 different images of volcanoes, including a 17th-century etching of Mount Vesuvius erupting and another of a smouldering Mount St. Helens which reveals, on close inspection, the exact ridgetop clearing where Hickson watched that mountain blow up. A third wall is covered by a big world map, flagged with 62 white and yellow tags. The yellow ones indicate volcanoes erupting this year. The white tags indicate volcanoes erupting now. This is a typical year's average: of the 500 active volcanoes worldwide, about 10 percent are actually erupting in any one year. Visible from her office window, 80 kilometres to the east in Washington state, the volcano most dangerous to Canadians, Mount Baker, rises in snowcapped ridges against the horizon. Its last major eruption occurred in 1854, although it spurted steam in 1975. It will inevitably blow up again - Hickson hopes in her lifetime. The dangers from volcanic explosions within Canada are, Hickson admits, very, very small. But at the country's margins, the hazards increase. A big eruption of Mount Baker could easily melt that mountain's ice cap, releasing debris flows into the rivers below, which - in a chain reaction - could become blocked and flood parts of B.C.'s Fraser Valley. More importantly, however, an explosion would send a plume of ash five or 10 kilometres into the air. Such ash-laden clouds are a serious danger to jets flying overhead, which could suck the ash into the turbines where it would melt and stall the aircraft's engines. Such an event occurred three years ago when a loaded KLM 747 flew into an ash cloud downwind from Alaska's Redoubt Volcano. All four engines quit. The aircraft plummeted - in a sudden terrifying silence - to 4,500 metres before the crew managed to restart their engines. This near-accident, along with 40 to 50 similar aircraft engine stalls caused by other eruptions around the globe, has prompted Hickson and Terry Spurgeon, a civilian aviation inspector with Transport Canada, to work toward a worldwide volcanic eruption warning system. Every day, international flights heading north and south from Vancouver fly over dozens of "Ring of Fire" volcanic sites on their way to Tokyo or Los Angeles. All it will take, Hickson knows, is one air disaster to convince people that the biggest volcanic threat to Canadians is not from an explosion, but from airborne ash. This means, says Hickson, that a worldwide monitoring system needs to be established to help volcanologists predict eruptions. New technology is allowing them to peer into the earth and assess what is going on. Seismic equipment can read the signature of micro-earthquakes indicating underground lava movement toward the surface. Laser measuring devices can detect the slightest deformation of rock on a volcano's flanks. Remote sensing devices can now analyse telltale gas emissions prior to an eruption. But a global system needs to be set up, advising pilots of the density and direction of volcanic ash once a mountain does blow up. Hickson, of course, wants to be there when that happens. She has witnessed three different explosions of Redoubt Volcano, the Mount St. Helens blast, and a series of 1987 eruptions on Hawaii. During that trip to Hawaii, while other visiting volcanologists stood near the edge of the volcano's lava lake and tossed a celebratory bottle of vodka into the crater below, Hickson wandered onward alone, looking for excitement. She came to an iridescent, orange river of boiling lava flowing downhill. She could feel the scorching heat on her face, and her nostrils filled with the combined acrid smells of sulphur and the singed hair on her arm. She took a long stick and poked it into the churning inferno, like a child playing around a northern Alberta campfire. The crust yielded to her proddings; a gob of corn-syrup-like lava stuck to her stick. "If a volcano goes, I want to be there," she says. Daniel Wood is a Vancouver writer. CAPTION p. 23 Catherine Hickson (above) examines columns of basalt formed from cooling lava about 10,000 years ago near today's Whistler, B.C. Their creation probably resembled this fire-fountaining display (left) on the flank of the still-active Kilauea Volcano in Hawaii. CAPTION p. 24 Hickson narrowly escaped the catastrophic eruption of Mount St. Helens (above) in Washington state on May 18, 1980, but the experience only fueled her fascination with volcanoes. On a return visit in October 1980, Hickson (left, centre) and two members of the U.S. Geological Survey were sent scurrying for their helicopter by a relatively small explosion of steam and ash. CAPTION p. 26 Left: Hickson collects another clue to Western Canada's volcanic history - a sample of basalt found at Brandywine Falls near Whistler in the Garibaldi Volcanic Belt of southwestern B.C. Below: a hiker admires the view from atop an iron-rich remnant of an ancient volcano in the Rainbow Range of south-central B.C. The site is part of a chain of volcanoes formed over the past 12 million years as North America's continental crust drifted west over a stationary hotspot in the earth's mantle, which periodically blasted through to the surface. CAPTION p. 29 A pastel sky lends a peaceful air to Mount Garibaldi (centre), part of the volcanic belt in southwestern B.C. formed as two offshore plates, Juan de Fuca and Explorer, slid under the edge of the continent. Garibaldi Lake (foreground) was created when lava from Clinker Peak (right) formed a natural dam about 10,000 years ago. The most recent major volcanic eruption in the Garibaldi belt, and in Canada, occurred about 2,350 years ago when nearby Mount Meager exploded with the power of 10 hydrogen bombs. CAPTION p.30 Above: in front of a map of the Pacific "Ring of Fire" in her Vancouver office, Hickson holds in one hand a reddish-brown basaltic "bomb" blown long ago from a volcano in the Wells Gray- Clearwater Volcanic Field in southeastern B.C., and in the other a grey "bread-crust bomb" from Mount St. Helens. Right, inset: the 150-metre-high Eve Cone in Mount Edziza Volcanic Field in northwestern B.C. was formed about 1,340 years ago in a process called fire-fountaining, where lava boils like a pot of porridge and spews showers of basaltic bombs which build up the cone. The cone's crater (right) measures about 45 metres deep. CAPTION p.32 Redoubt Volcano steams picturesquely over the evening lights of Anchorage, Alaska, after a series of eruptions from December 1989 to June 1990 that coated the city, 125 kilometres away, with a fine, grey ash. CAPTION p.34 Above: despite sulphur fumes and fierce heat, Hickson could not resist poking a stick into lava flowing from Pu'u-O'o on the flank of Kilauea Volcano in Hawaii in 1987. Below: Langley, B.C., and other Fraser Valley communities would likely get a layer of ash if Mount Baker, some 25 kilometres south of the B.C.-Washington border, were to erupt. Somewhat to Hickson's regret, no major eruption is expected in any Canadian volcanic field in the foreseeable future.

<#GLO>
Volcanic and Geologic Terms

'A'a, Hawaiian word used to describe a lava flow whose surface is broken into rough angular fragments. 
Accessory, A mineral whose presence in a rock is not essential to the proper classification of the rock.
Accidental, Pyroclastic rocks that are formed from fragments of non-volcanic rocks or from volcanic rocks not related to the erupting volcano.
Accretionary Lava Ball, A rounded mass, ranging in diameter from a few centimeters to several meters, [carried] on the surface of a lava flow (e.g., 'a'a) or on cinder-cone slopes [and formed] by the molding of viscous lava around a core of already solidified lava.
Acid, A descriptive term applied to igneous rocks with more than 60% silica (SiO2).
Active Volcano, A volcano that is erupting. Also, a volcano that is not presently erupting, but that has erupted within historical time and is considered likely to do so in the future.
Agglutinate, A pyroclastic deposit consisting of an accumulation of originally plastic eject a and formed by the coherence of the fragments upon solidification. 
Alkalic, Rocks which contain above average amounts of sodium and/or potassium for the group of rocks for which it belongs. For example, the basalts of the capping stage of Hawaiian volcanoes are alkalic. They contain more sodium and/or potassium than the shield-building basalts that make the bulk of the volcano.
Andesite, Volcanic rock (or lava) characteristically medium dark in color and containing 54 to 62 percent silica and moderate amounts of iron and magnesium.
Ash, Fine particles of pulverized rock blown from an explosion vent. Measuring less than 1/10 inch in diameter, ash may be either solid or molten when first erupted. By far the most common variety is vitric ash (glassy particles formed by gas bubbles bursting through liquid magma).
Ashfall (Airfall), Volcanic ash that has fallen through the air from an eruption cloud. A deposit so formed is usually well sorted and layered.
Ash Flow, A turbulent mixture of gas and rock fragments, most of which are ash-sized particles, ejected violently from a crater or fissure. The mass of pyroclastics is normally of very high temperature and moves rapidly down the slopes or even along a level surface.
Asthenosphere, The shell within the earth, some tens of kilometers below the surface and of undefined thickness, which is a shell of weakness where plastic movements take place to permit pressure adjustments.
Aquifer, A body of rock that contains significant quantities of water that can be tapped by wells or springs. 
Avalanche, A large mass of material or mixtures of material falling or sliding rapidly under the force of gravity. Avalanches often are classified by their content, such as snow, ice, soil, or rock avalanches. A mixture of these materials is a debris avalanche.
Basalt, Volcanic rock (or lava) that characteristically is dark in color, contains 45% to 54% silica, and generally is rich in iron and magnesium.
Basement, The undifferentiated rocks that underlie the rocks of interest in an area.
Basic, A descriptive term applied to igneous rocks (basalt and gabbro) with silica (SiO2) between 44% and 52%.
Bench, The unstable, newly-formed front of a lava delta.
Blister, A swelling of the crust of a lava flow formed by the puffing-up of gas or vapor beneath the flow. Blisters are about 1 meter in diameter and hollow.
Block, Angular chunk of solid rock ejected during an eruption.
Bomb, Fragment of molten or semi-molten rock, 2 1/2 inches to many feet in diameter, which is blown out during an eruption. Because of their plastic condition, bombs are often modified in shape during their flight or upon impact.
Caldera, The Spanish word for cauldron, a basin-shaped volcanic depression; by definition, at least a mile in diameter. Such large depressions are typically formed by the subsidence of volcanoes. Crater Lake occupies the best-known caldera in the Cascades.
Capping Stage, Refers to a stage in the evolution of a typical Hawaiian volcano during which alkalic, basalt, and related rocks build a steeply, sloping cap on the main shield of the volcano. Eruptions are less frequent, but more explosive. The summit caldera may be buried. 
Central Vent, A central vent is an opening at the Earth's surface of a volcanic conduit of cylindrical or pipe-like form.
Central Volcano, A volcano constructed by the ejection of debris and lava flows from a central point, forming a more or less symmetrical volcano.
Cinder Cone, A volcanic cone built entirely of loose fragmented material (pyroclastics.)
Cirque, A steep-walled horseshoe-shaped recess high on a mountain that is formed by glacial erosion.
Cleavage, The breaking of a mineral along crystallographic planes, that reflects a crystal structure.
Composite Volcano, A steep volcanic cone built by both lava flows and pyroclastic eruptions.
Compound Volcano, A volcano that consists of a complex of two or more vents, or a volcano that has an associated volcanic dome, either in its crater or on its flanks. Examples are Vesuvius and Mont Pelee.
Compression Waves, Earthquake waves that move like a slinky. As the wave moves to the left, for example, it expands and compresses in the same direction as it moves. 
Conduit, A passage followed by magma in a volcano. 
Continental Crust, Solid, outer layers of the earth, including the rocks of the continents. 
Continental Drift, The theory that horizontal movement of the earth's surface causes slow, relative movements of the continents toward or away from one another. 
Country Rocks, The rock intruded by and surrounding an igneous intrusion.
Crater, A steep-sided, usually circular depression formed by either explosion or collapse at a volcanic vent.
Craton, A part of the earth's crust that has attained stability and has been little deformed for a prolonged period.
Curtain of Fire, A row of coalescing lava fountains along a fissure; a typical feature of a Hawaiian-type eruption.
Dacite, Volcanic rock (or lava) that characteristically is light in color and contains 62% to 69% silica and moderate a mounts of sodium and potassium.
Debris Avalanche, A rapid and unusually sudden sliding or flowage of unsorted masses of rock and other material. As applied to the major avalanche involved in the eruption of Mount St. Helens, a rapid mass movement that included fragmented cold and hot volcanic rock, water, snow, glacier ice, trees, and some hot pyroclastic material. Most of the May 18, 1980 deposits in the upper valley of the North Fork Toutle River and in the vicinity of Spirit Lake are from the debris avalanche.
Debris Flow, A mixture of water-saturated rock debris that flows downslope under the force of gravity (also called lahar or mudflow).
Detachment Plane, The surface along which a landslide disconnects from its original position.
Devonian, A period of time in the Paleozoic Era that covered the time span between 400 and 345 million years.
Diatreme, A breccia filled volcanic pipe that was formed by a gaseous explosion.
Dike, A sheetlike body of igneous rock that cuts across layering or contacts in the rock into which it intrudes.
Dome, A steep-sided mass of viscous (doughy) lava extruded from a volcanic vent (often circular in plane view) and spiny, rounded, or flat on top. Its surface is often rough and blocky as a result of fragmentation of the cooler, outer crust during growth of the dome.
Dormant Volcano, Literally, "sleeping." The term is used to describe a volcano which is presently inactive but which may erupt again. Most of the major Cascade volcanoes are believed to be dormant rather than extinct.
Drainage Basin, The area of land drained by a river system.
Echelon, Set of geologic features that are in an overlapping or a staggered arrangement (e.g., faults). Each is relatively short, but collectively they form a linear zone in which the strike of the individual features is oblique to that of the zone as a whole.
Ejecta, Material that is thrown out by a volcano, including pyroclastic material (tephra) and lava bombs.
Episode, An episode is a volcanic event that is distinguished by its duration or style.
Eruption, The process by which solid, liquid, and gaseous materials are ejected into the earth's atmosphere and onto the earth's surface by volcanic activity. Eruptions range from the quiet overflow of liquid rock to the tremendously violent expulsion of pyroclastics.
Eruption Cloud, The column of gases, ash, and larger rock fragments rising from a crater or other vent. If it is of sufficient volume and velocity, this gaseous column may reach many miles into the stratosphere, where high winds will carry it long distances.
Eruptive Vent, The opening through which volcanic material is emitted.
Evacuate, Temporarily move people away from possible danger. 
Extinct Volcano, A volcano that is not presently erupting and is not likely to do so for a very long time in the future. 
Extrusion, The emission of magmatic material at the earth's surface. Also, the structure or form produced by the process (e.g., a lava flow, volcanic dome, or certain pyroclastic rocks).
Fault, A crack or fracture in the earth's surface. Movement along the fault can cause earthquakes or--in the process of mountain-building--can release underlying magma and permit it to rise to the surface.
Fault Scarp A steep slope or cliff formed directly by movement along a fault and representing the exposed surface of the fault before modification by erosion and weathering.
Felsic, An igneous rock having abundant light-colored minerals.
Fire fountain, See also, lava fountain
Fissures, Elongated fractures or cracks on the slopes of a volcano. Fissure eruptions typically produce liquid flows, but pyroclastics may also be ejected.
Flank Eruption, An eruption from the side of a volcano (in contrast to a summit eruption.)
Fluvial, Produced by the action of of flowing water.
Formation, A body of rock identified by lithic characteristics and stratigraphic position and is mappable at the earth's surface or traceable in the subsurface.
Fracture, The manner of breaking due to intense folding or faulting.
Fumarole, A vent or opening through which issue steam, hydrogen sulfide, or other gases. The craters of many dormant volcanoes contain active fumaroles.
Geothermal Energy, Energy derived from the internal heat of the earth.
Geothermal Power, Power generated by using the heat energy of the earth.
Graben, An elongate crustal block that is relatively depressed (downdropped) between two fault systems.
Guyot, A type of seamount that has a platform top. Named for a nineteenth-century Swiss-American geologist.
Hardness, The resistance of a mineral to scratching.
Harmonic Tremor, A continuous release of seismic energy typically associated with the underground movement of magma. It contrasts distinctly with the sudden release and rapid decrease of seismic energy associated with the more common type of earthquake caused by slippage along a fault.
Heat transfer, Movement of heat from one place to another.
Heterolithologic, Material is made up of a heterogeneous mix of different rock types. Instead of being composed on one rock type, it is composed of fragments of many different rocks.
Holocene, The time period from 10,000 years ago to the present. Also, the rocks and deposits of that age. 
Horizontal Blast, An explosive eruption in which the resultant cloud of hot ash and other material moves laterally rather than upward. 
Horst, A block of the earth's crust, generally long compared to its width, that has been uplifted along faults relative to the rocks on either side. 
Hot Spot, A volcanic center, 60 to 120 miles (100 to 200 km) across and persistent for at least a few tens of million of years, that is thought to be the surface expression of a persistent rising plume of hot mantle material. Hot spots are not linked to arcs and may not be associated with ocean ridges.
Hot-spot Volcanoes, Volcanoes related to a persistent heat source in the mantle.
Hyaloclastite, A deposit formed by the flowing or intrusion of lava or magma into water, ice, or water-saturated sediment and its consequent granulation or shattering into small angular fragments.
Hydrothermal Reservoir, An underground zone of porous rock containing hot water.
Hypabyssal, A shallow intrusion of magma or the resulting solidified rock.
Hypocenter, The place on a buried fault where an earthquake occurs. 
Ignimbrite, The rock formed by the widespread deposition and consolidation of ash flows and Nuees Ardentes. The term was originally applied only to densely welded deposits but now includes non-welded deposits.
Intensity, A measure of the effects of an earthquake at a particular place. 
Intensity depends not only on the magnitude of the earthquake, but also on the distance from the epicenter and the local geology.
Intermediate, A descriptive term applied to igneous rocks that are transitional between basic and acidic with silica (SiO2) between 54% and 65%.
Intrusion, The process of emplacement of magma in pre-existing rock. Also, the term refers to igneous rock mass so formed within the surrounding rock.
Joint, A surface of fracture in a rock.
Juvenile, Pyroclastic material derived directly from magma reaching the surface.
Kipuka, An area surrounded by a lava flow.
Laccolith, A body of igneous rocks with a flat bottom and domed top. It is parallel to the layers above and below it. 
Lahar, A torrential flow of water-saturated volcanic debris down the slope of a volcano in response to gravity. A type of mudflow. 
Landsat, A series of unmanned satellites orbiting at about 706 km (438 miles) above the surface of the earth. The satellites carry cameras similar to video cameras and take images or pictures showing features as small as 30 m or 80 m wide, depending on which camera is used. 
Lapilli, Literally, "little stones." Round to angular rock fragments, measuring 1/10 inch to 2 1/2 inches in diameter, which may be ejected in either a solid or molten state.
Lava, Magma which has reached the surface through a volcanic eruption. The term is most commonly applied to streams of liquid rock that flow from a crater or fissure. It also refers to cooled and solidified rock.
Lava Dome, Mass of lava, created by many individual flows, that has built a dome-shaped pile of lava.
Lava Flow, An outpouring of lava onto the land surface from a vent or fissure. 
Also, a solidified tongue like or sheet-like body formed by outpouring lava.
Lava Fountain, A rhythmic vertical fountainlike eruption of lava. 
Lava Lake (Pond), A lake of molten lava, usually basaltic, contained in a vent, crater, or broad depression of a shield volcano.
Lava Shields, A shield volcano made of basaltic lava.
Lava Tube, A tunnel formed when the surface of a lava flow cools and solidifies while the still-molten interior flows through and drains away.
Limu O Pele (Pele Seaweed), Delicate, translucent sheets of spatter filled with tiny glass bubbles.
Lithic, Of or pertaining to stone.
Lithosphere, The rigid crust and uppermost mantle of the earth. Thickness is on the order of 60 miles (100 km). Stronger than the underlying asthenosphere.
Luster, The reflection of light from the surface of a mineral.
Maar, A volcanic crater that is produced by an explosion in an area of low relief, is generally more or less circular, and often contains a lake, pond, or marsh.
Mafic, An igneous composed chiefly of one or more dark-colored minerals. 
Magma, Molten rock beneath the surface of the earth.
Magma Chamber, The subterranean cavity containing the gas-rich liquid magma which feeds a volcano.
Magmatic, Pertaining to magma.
Magnitude, A numerical expression of the amount of energy released by an earthquake, determined by measuring earthquake waves on standardized recording instruments (seismographs.) The number scale for magnitudes is logarithmic rather than arithmetic. Therefore, deflections on a seismograph for a magnitude 5 earthquake, for example, are 10 times greater than those for a magnitude 4 earthquake, 100 times greater than for a magnitude 3 earthquake, and so on.
Mantle, The zone of the earth below the crust and above the core.
Matrix, The solid matter in which a fossil or crystal is embedded. Also, a binding substance (e.g., cement in concrete).
Miocene, An epoch in Earth's history from about 24 to 5 million years ago. Also refers to the rocks that formed in that epoch. 
Moho, Also called the Mohorovicic discontinuity. The surface or discontinuity that separates the crust from the mantle. The Moho is at a depth of 5-10 km beneath the ocean floor and about 35 km below the continents (but down to 60 km below mountains). Named for Andrija Mohorovicic, a Croatian seismologist.
Monogenetic, A volcano built by a single eruption. 
Mudflow, A flowage of water-saturated earth material possessing a high degree of fluidity during movement. A less-saturated flowing mass is often called a debris flow. A mudflow originating on the flank of a volcano is properly called a lahar.
Myth, A fictional story to explain the origin of some person, place, or thing. 
Nuees Ardentes, A French term applied to a highly heated mass of gas-charged ash which is expelled with explosive force and moves hurricane speed down the mountainside. 
Obsidian, A black or dark-colored volcanic glass, usually composed of rhyolite.
Oceanic Crust, The earth's crust where it underlies oceans. 
Pahoehoe, A Hawaiian term for lava with a smooth, billowy, or ropy surface. 
Pali, Hawaiian word for steep hills or cliffs.
Pele Hair, A natural spun glass formed by blowing-out during quiet fountaining of fluid lava, cascading lava falls, or turbulent flows, sometimes in association with pele tears. A single strand, with a diameter of less than half a millimeter, may be as long as two meters.
Pele Tears, Small, solidified drops of volcanic glass behind which trail pendants of Pele hair. They may be tear-shaped, spherical, or nearly cylindrical.
Peralkaline, Igneous rocks in which the molecular proportion of aluminum oxide is less than that of sodium and potassium oxides combined.
Phenocryst, A conspicuous, usually large, crystal embedded in porphyritic igneous rock.
Phreatic Eruption (Explosion), An explosive volcanic eruption caused when water and heated volcanic rocks interact to produce a violent expulsion of steam and pulverized rocks. Magma is not involved.
Phreatomagmatic, An explosive volcanic eruption that results from the interaction of surface or subsurface water and magma.
Pillow lava, Interconnected, sack-like bodies of lava formed underwater.
Pipe, A vertical conduit through the Earth's crust below a volcano, through which magmatic materials have passed. Commonly filled with volcanic breccia and fragments of older rock.
Pit Crater, A crater formed by sinking in of the surface, not primarily a vent for lava.
Plastic, Capable of being molded into any form, which is retained.
Plate Tectonics, The theory that the earth's crust is broken into about 10 fragments (plates,) which move in relation to one another, shifting continents, forming new ocean crust, and stimulating volcanic eruptions.
Pleistocene, A epoch in Earth history from about 2-5 million years to 10,000 years ago. Also refers to the rocks and sediment deposited in that epoch.
Plinian Eruption, An explosive eruption in which a steady, turbulent stream of fragmented magma and magmatic gases is released at a high velocity from a vent. 
Large volumes of tephra and tall eruption columns are characteristic.
Plug, Solidified lava that fills the conduit of a volcano. It is usually more resistant to erosion than the material making up the surrounding cone, and may remain standing as a solitary pinnacle when the rest of the original structure has eroded away.
Plug Dome, The steep-sided, rounded mound formed when viscous lava wells up into a crater and is too stiff to flow away. It piles up as a dome-shaped mass, often completely filling the vent from which it emerged.
Pluton, A large igneous intrusion formed at great depth in the crust.
Polygenetic, Originating in various ways or from various sources.
Precambrian,All geologic time from the beginning of Earth history to 570 million years ago. Also refers to the rocks that formed in that epoch. 
Pumice, Light-colored, frothy volcanic rock, usually of dacite or rhyolite composition, formed by the expansion of gas in erupting lava. Commonly seen as lumps or fragments of pea-size and larger, but can also occur abundantly as ash-sized particles. 
Pyroclastic, Pertaining to fragmented (clastic) rock material formed by a volcanic explosion or ejection from a volcanic vent.
Pyroclastic Flow, Lateral flowage of a turbulent mixture of hot gases and unsorted pyroclastic material (volcanic fragments, crystals, ash, pumice, and glass shards) that can move at high speed (50 to 100 miles an hour.) The term also can refer to the deposit so formed.
Quaternary, The period of Earth's history from about 2 million years ago to the present; also, the rocks and deposits of that age.
Relief, The vertical difference between the summit of a mountain and the adjacent valley or plain. 
Renewed Volcanism State, Refers to a state in the evolution of a typical Hawaiian volcano during which --after a long period of quiescence--lava and tephra erupt intermittently. Erosion and reef building continue.
Repose, The interval of time between volcanic eruptions. 
Rhyodacite, An extrusive rock intermediate in composition between dacite and rhyolite.
Rhyolite, Volcanic rock (or lava) that characteristically is light in color, contains 69% silica or more, and is rich in potassium and sodium.
Ridge, Oceanic, A major submarine mountain range.
Rift System, The oceanic ridges formed where tectonic plates are separating and a new crust is being created; also, their on-land counterparts such as the East African Rift.
Rift Zone, A zone of volcanic features associated with underlying dikes. The location of the rift is marked by cracks, faults, and vents.
Ring of Fire, The regions of mountain-building earthquakes and volcanoes which 
surround the Pacific Ocean.
Scoria, A bomb-size (> 64 mm) pyroclast that is irregular in form and generally very vesicular. It is usually heavier, darker, and more crystalline than pumice. 
Seafloor Spreading, The mechanism by which new seafloor crust is created at oceanic ridges and slowly spreads away as plates are separating.
Seamount, A submarine volcano.
Seismograph, An instrument that records seismic waves; that is, vibrations of the earth.
Seismologist, Scientists who study earthquake waves and what they tell us about the inside of the Earth. 
Seismometer, An instrument that measures motion of the ground caused by earthquake waves. 
Shearing, The motion of surfaces sliding past one another.
Shear Waves, Earthquake waves that move up and down as the wave itself moves. 
For example, to the left. 
Shield Volcano, A gently sloping volcano in the shape of a flattened dome and built almost exclusively of lava flows.
Shoshonite, A trachyandesite composed of olivine and augite phenocrysts in a groundmass of labradorite with alkali feldspar rims, olivine, augite, a small amount of leucite, and some dark-colored glass. Its name is derived from the Shoshone River, Wyoming and given by Iddings in 1895.
Silica, A chemical combination of silicon and oxygen.
Sill, A tabular body of intrusive igneous rock, parallel to the layering of the rocks into which it intrudes.
Skylight, An opening formed by a collapse in the roof of a lava tube.
Solfatara, A type of fumarole, the gases of which are characteristically sulfurous. 
Spatter Cone, A low, steep-sided cone of spatter built up on a fissure or vent. It is usually of basaltic material.
Spatter Rampart, A ridge of congealed pyroclastic material (usually basaltic) built up on a fissure or vent.
Specific Gravity, The density of a mineral divided by the density of water.
Spines, Horn-like projections formed upon a lava dome.
Stalactite, A cone shaped deposit of minerals hanging from the roof of a cavern.
Stratigraphic, The study of rock strata, especially of their distribution, deposition, and age.
Stratovolcano, A volcano composed of both lava flows and pyroclastic material.
Streak, The color of a mineral in the powdered form. 
Strike-Slip Fault, A nearly vertical fault with side-slipping displacement.
Strombolian Eruption, A type of volcanic eruption characterized by jetting of clots or fountains of fluid basaltic lava from a central crater. 
Subduction Zone, The zone of convergence of two tectonic plates, one of which usually overrides the other.
Surge, A ring-shaped cloud of gas and suspended solid debris that moves radially outward at high velocity as a density flow from the base of a vertical eruption column accompanying a volcanic eruption or crater formation. 
Talus, A slope formed a the base of a steeper slope, made of fallen and disintegrated materials.
Tephra, Materials of all types and sizes that are erupted from a crater or volcanic vent and deposited from the air.
Tephrochronology, The collection, preparation, petrographic description, and approximate dating of tephra.
Tilt, The angle between the slope of a part of a volcano and some reference. The reference may be the slope of the volcano at some previous time. 
Trachyandesite, An extrusive rock intermediate in composition between trachyte and andesite.
Trachybasalt, An extrusive rock intermediate in composition between trachyte and basalt.
Trachyte, A group of fine-grained, generally porphyritic, extrusive igneous rocks having alkali feldspar and minor mafic minerals as the main components, and possibly a small amount of sodic plagioclase.
Tremor, Low amplitude, continuous earthquake activity often associated with magma movement.
Tsunami, A great sea wave produced by a submarine earthquake, volcanic eruption, or large landslide.
Tuff, Rock formed of pyroclastic material.
Tuff Cone, A type of volcanic cone formed by the interaction of basaltic magma and water. Smaller and steeper than a tuff ring. 
Tuff Ring, A wide, low-rimmed, well-bedded accumulation of hyalo-clastic debris built around a volcanic vent located in a lake, coastal zone, marsh, or area of abundant ground water. 
Tumulus, A doming or small mound on the crest of a lava flow caused by pressure due to the difference in the rate of flow between the cooler crust and the more fluid lava below. 
Ultramafic, Igneous rocks made mostly of the mafic minerals hypersthene, augite, and/or olivine. 
Unconformity, A substantial break or gap in the geologic record where a rock unit is overlain by another that is not next in stratigraphic sucession, such as an interruption in continuity of a depositional sequence of sedimentary rocks or a break between eroded igneous rocks and younger sedimentary strata. It results from a change that caused deposition to cease for a considerable time, and it normally implies uplift and erosion with loss of the previous formed record. 
Vent, The opening at the earth's surface through which volcanic materials issue forth. 
Vesicle, A small air pocket or cavity formed in volcanic rock during solidification.
Viscosity, A measure of resistance to flow in a liquid (water has low viscosity while honey has a higher viscosity.)
Volcano, A vent in the surface of the Earth through which magma and associated gases and ash erupt; also, the form or structure (usually conical) that is produced by the ejected material.
Volcanic Arc, A generally curved linear belt of volcanoes above a subduction zone, and the volcanic and plutonic rocks formed there.
Volcanic Complex, A persistent volcanic vent area that has built a complex combination of volcanic landforms.
Volcanic Cone, A mound of loose material that was ejected ballistically.
Volcanic Neck, A massive pillar of rock more resistant to erosion than the lavas and pyroclastic rocks of a volcanic cone. 
Vulcan, Roman god of fire and the forge after whom volcanoes are named.
Vulcanian, A type of eruption consisting of the explosive ejection of incandescent fragments of new viscous lava, usually on the form of blocks. 
Water Table, The surface between where the pore space in rock is filled with water and where the the pore space in rock is filled with air. 
Xenocrysts, A crystal that resembles a phenocryst in igneous rock, but is a foreign to the body of rock in which it occurs.
Xenoliths, A foreign inclusion in an igneous rock. 


Glossary compiled from,
Audubon Society, The Once and Future Mountain (July, 1980)
Bullard, Fred M., Volcanoes of the Earth (London, University of Texas Press, 1976)
Decker and Decker, Volcanoes (W.H. Freeman and Company, 1980)
Foxworthy and Hill, Volcanic Eruptions of Mount St. Helens, The First 100 Days (U.S. Geological Survey)
Korosec, The 1980 Eruption of Mount St. Helens (Washington State Department of Natural Resources) 
MacDonald, Volcanoes (Prentice-Hall)
Tilling, Eruptions of Mount St. Helens, Past, Present and Future (U.S. Geological Survey) 
Bates, R.L., and Jackson, J.A., Glossary of Geology (American Geological Institute, 1987)
Takahashi, T.J., and Griggs, J.D., Hawaiian Volcanic Features, A Photoglossary 
(U.S. Geological Survey Professional Paper 1350, v. 2, 1987).
USGS Glossary









